<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Scatter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-5" id="chapter-2-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Scatter</h4>
			<p>She finds him on the abyssal plain, searching. He’s been out here for hours; sonar showed him tracking back and forth, back and forth, all the way to the carousel, out to the whale, back again, in and around the labyrinthine geography of the Throat itself.</p>
			<p>Alone. All alone.</p>
			<p>She can feel his desperation fifty meters away. The facets of that pain glimmer in her mind as the squid pulls her closer. Guilt. Fear.</p>
			<p>Growing with her approach, anger.</p>
			<p>Her headlight sweeps across a small contrail on the bottom, a wake of mud kicked back into suspension after a million-year sleep. Clarke changes course to follow and kills the beam. Darkness clamps around her. This far out, photons evade even rifter eyes.</p>
			<p>She feels him seething directly ahead. When she pulls up beside him the water swirls with unseen turbulence. Her squid shudders from the impact of Brander’s fists.</p>
			<p>“Keep that fucking thing out of here! You <i>know</i> he doesn’t like it!”</p>
			<p>She draws down the throttle. The soft hydraulic whine fades.</p>
			<p>“Sorry,” she says. “I just thought⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Fuck, Len, you of all people! You <i>trying</i> to drive him off? You <i>want</i> him blasted into the fucking stratosphere when that thing goes off?”</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry.” When he doesn’t respond, she adds, “I don’t think he’s out here. Sonar⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Sonar’s not worth shit if he’s on the bottom.”</p>
			<p>“Mike, you’re not going find him rooting around here in the dark. We’re blind this far out.”</p>
			<p>A wave of pistol clicks sweeps across her face. “I’ve got this for close range,” says the machinery in Brander’s throat.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think he’s out here,” Clarke says again. “And even if he is, I don’t know if he’d let you get close after⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That was a long time ago,” the darkness buzzes back. “Just because <i>you’re</i> still nursing grudges from the second grade⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“That’s not what I meant,” she says. She tries to speak gently, but the vocoder strips her voice down to a soft rasp. “I only meant, it’s been so long. He’s gone so far, we barely even see him on sonar any more. I don’t know if he’d let <i>any</i> of us near him.”</p>
			<p>“We’ve got to try. We can’t just leave him here. If I can just get close enough to tune him in⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“He couldn’t tune back,” Clarke reminds him. “He went over before we changed, Mike. You know that.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Fuck off! That’s not the point!</i>”</p>
			<p>But it is, and they both know it. And Lenie Clarke suddenly knows something else, too. She knows that part of her is enjoying Brander’s pain. She fights it, tries to ignore the realization of her own realization, because the only way to keep it from leaking into Brander’s head is to keep it out of her own. She can’t. No: she doesn’t <i>want</i> to. Mike Brander, know-it-all, destroyer of perverts, self-righteous self-appointed self-avenger, is finally getting some small payback for what he did to Gerry Fischer.</p>
			<p><i>Give it up,</i> she wants to shout at him. <i>Gerry’s gone. Didn’t you tune him in when that prick Scanlon held him hostage? Didn’t you feel how</i> empty <i>he was? Or was all that too much for you, did you just look the other way instead? Well here’s the abstract, Mikey: he’s nowhere near human enough to grasp your half-assed gestures of atonement.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>No absolution this time, Mike. You get to take this to your grave. Ain’t justice a bitch?</i>
			</p>
			<p>She waits for him to tune her in, to feel her contempt diluting that frantic morass of guilt and self-pity. It doesn’t happen. She waits and waits. Mike Brander, awash in his own symphony, just doesn’t notice.</p>
			<p>“Shit,” hisses Lenie Clarke, softly.</p>
			<p>“Come in,” calls Alice Nakata, from very far away. “Everybody, come in.”</p>
			<p>Clarke boosts her gain. “Alice? Lenie.”</p>
			<p>“Mike,” Brander says a long moment later. “I’m listening.”</p>
			<p>“You should get back here,” Nakata tells them. “They called.”</p>
			<p>“Who? The GA?”</p>
			<p>“They say they want to evacuate us. They say twelve hours.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“This is bullshit,” says Brander.</p>
			<p>“Who was it?” Lubin wants to know.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” Nakata says. “I think, no one that we’ve spoken to before.”</p>
			<p>“And that was all he said? Evac in twelve?”</p>
			<p>“And we are supposed to remain inside Beebe until then.”</p>
			<p>“No explanation? No reason given?”</p>
			<p>“He hung up as soon as I acknowledged the order.” Nakata looks vaguely apologetic. “I did not get the chance to ask, and nobody answered when I called back.”</p>
			<p>Brander stands up and heads for Comm.</p>
			<p>“I’ve already set retry,” Clarke says. “It’ll beep when it gets through.”</p>
			<p>Brander stops, stares at the nearest bulkhead. Punches it.</p>
			<p>“This is <i>bullshit</i>!”</p>
			<p>Lubin just watches.</p>
			<p>“Maybe not,” Nakata says. “Maybe it’s good news. If they were going to leave us here when they detonated, why would they lie about extraction? Why talk to us at all?”</p>
			<p>“To keep us nice and close to ground zero,” Brander spits. “Now here’s a question for you, Alice: if they’re really planning on evacuating us, why not tell us the reason?”</p>
			<p>Nakata shrugs helplessly. “I do not know. The GA does not often tell us what is going on.”</p>
			<p><i>Maybe they’re trying to psyche us out</i>, Clarke muses. <i>Maybe they</i> want <i>us to make a break, for some reason.</i></p>
			<p>“Well,” she says aloud, “how far could we get in twelve hours anyway? Even with squids? What are the chances we’d reach safe distance?”</p>
			<p>“Depends on how big the bomb is,” Brander says.</p>
			<p>“Actually,” Lubin remarks, “assuming that they want to keep us here for twelve hours because that <i>would</i> be enough time to get away, we might be able to work out the range.”</p>
			<p>“If they didn’t just pull that number out of a hat,” Brander says.</p>
			<p>“It still makes no sense,” Nakata insists. “Why cut off our communications? That is guaranteed to make us suspicious.”</p>
			<p>“They took Judy,” Lubin says.</p>
			<p>Clarke takes a deep breath. “One thing’s true, anyway.”</p>
			<p>The others turn.</p>
			<p>“They want to keep us here,” she finishes.</p>
			<p>Brander smacks fist into palm. “And that’s the best single reason for getting the fuck out, you ask me. Soon as we can.”</p>
			<p>“I agree,” Lubin says.</p>
			<p>Brander stares at him.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“I’ll find him,” she says. “I’ll do my best, anyway.”</p>
			<p>Brander shakes his head. “I should stay. We should all stay. The chances of finding him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The chances of finding him are best if I go out alone,” Clarke reminds him. “He still comes out, sometimes, when I’m there. You wouldn’t even get close.”</p>
			<p>He knows that, of course. He’s just making token protests; if he can’t get absolution from Fischer, at least he can try and look like a saint to everyone else.</p>
			<p><i>Still</i>, Clarke remembers, <i>it’s not entirely his fault. He’s got baggage like the rest of us.</i></p>
			<p><i>Even if he</i> did <i>mean harm⁠ ⁠…</i></p>
			<p>“Well, the others are waiting. I guess we’re off.”</p>
			<p>Clarke nods.</p>
			<p>“You coming outside?”</p>
			<p>She shakes her head. “I’ll do a sonar sweep first. You never know, I might get lucky.”</p>
			<p>“Well, don’t take too long. Only eight hours to go.”</p>
			<p>“I know.”</p>
			<p>“And if you can’t find him after an hour⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know. I’ll be right behind you.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll be⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Out to the dead whale, then steady bearing eighty-five degrees,” she says. “I know.”</p>
			<p>“Look, you sure about this? We can wait in here for you. One hour’s probably not going to make much difference.”</p>
			<p>She shakes her head. “I’m sure.”</p>
			<p>“Okay.” He stands there, looking uncomfortable. One hand starts to rise, wavers, falls back.</p>
			<p>He climbs down the ladder.</p>
			<p>“Mike,” she calls down after him.</p>
			<p>He looks up.</p>
			<p>“Do you really think they’re going to blow that thing up?”</p>
			<p>He shrugs. “I dunno. Maybe not. But you’re right: they want us here for <i>some</i> reason. Whatever it is, I bet we wouldn’t like it.”</p>
			<p>Clarke considers that.</p>
			<p>“See you soon,” Brander says, stepping into the ‘lock.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Bye,” she whispers.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can’t hear much of anything these days.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke sits in the darkness, listening. When was the last time these walls complained about the pressure? She can’t remember. When she first came down here the station groaned incessantly, filled every waking moment with creaking reminders of the weight on its shoulders. But sometime since then it must have made peace with the ocean; the water pushing down and the armor pushing back have finally settled to equilibrium.</p>
			<p>Of course, there are other kinds of pressure on the Juan de Fuca Rift.</p>
			<p>She almost revels in the silence now. No clanging footfalls disturb her, no sudden outbursts of random violence. The only pulse she hears is her own. The only breath comes from the air conditioners.</p>
			<p>She flexes her fingers, lets them dig into the fabric of the chair. She can see into the communications cubby from her position in the lounge. Occasional telltales flicker through the hatchway, the only available light. For Clarke, it’s enough; her eyecaps grab those meager photons and show her a room in twilight. She hasn’t gone into Comm since the rest of them left. She didn’t watch their icons crawl off the edge of the screen, and she hasn’t swept the rift for signs of Gerry Fischer.</p>
			<p>She doesn’t intend to now. She doesn’t know if she ever did.</p>
			<p>Far away, Lubin’s lonely windchimes serenade her.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Clank.</i>
			</p>
			<p>From below.</p>
			<p>
				<i>No. Stay away. Leave me alone.</i>
			</p>
			<p>She hears the airlock draining, hears it open. Three soft footsteps. Movement on the ladder.</p>
			<p>Ken Lubin rises into the lounge like a shadow.</p>
			<p>“Mike and Alice?” she says, afraid to let him begin.</p>
			<p>“Heading out. I told them I’d catch up.”</p>
			<p>“We’re spreading ourselves pretty thin,” she remarks.</p>
			<p>“I think Brander was just as happy to be rid of me for a while.”</p>
			<p>She smiles faintly.</p>
			<p>“You’re not coming,” he says.</p>
			<p>Clarke shakes her head. “Don’t try⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I won’t.”</p>
			<p>He folds himself down into a convenient chair. She watches him move. There’s a careful grace about him, there always has been. He moves as though always afraid of damaging something.</p>
			<p>“I thought you might do this,” he says after a while.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry. I didn’t know myself until, well⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He waits for her to continue.</p>
			<p>“I want to know what’s going on,” she says at last. “Maybe they really <i>are</i> playing straight with us this time. It’s not <i>that</i> unlikely. Maybe things aren’t as bad as we thought⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Lubin seems to consider that. “What about Fischer? Do you want me to⁠—”</p>
			<p>She barks a short laugh. “Fischer? You really want to drag him through the muck for days on end, and then haul him onto some fucking beach where he can’t even stand up without breaking both his legs? Maybe it’d make Mike feel a bit better. Not much of an act of charity for Gerry, though.”</p>
			<p>And not, she knows now, for Lenie Clarke either. She’s been deluding herself all this time. She felt herself getting stronger and she thought she could just walk away with that gift, take it anywhere. She thought she could pack all of Channer inside of her like some new prosthetic.</p>
			<p>But now. Now the mere thought of leaving brings all her old weakness rushing back. The future opens before her and she feels herself devolving, curling up into some soft prehuman tadpole, cursed now with the memory of how it once felt to be made of steel.</p>
			<p>
				<i>It’s not me. It never was. It was just the rift, using me⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>“I guess,” she says at last, “I just didn’t change that much after all⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Lubin looks as though he’s almost smiling.</p>
			<p>His expression awakens some vague, impatient anger in her. “Why did you come back here anyway?” she demands. “You never gave a shit about what any of us did, or why. All you ever cared about was your own agenda, whatever that⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Something clicks. Lubin’s virtual smile disappears.</p>
			<p>“You know.” Clarke says. “You know what this is all about.”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Bullshit, Ken. Mike was right, you know way too much. You knew exactly what question to ask the Drybacks about the CPU on that bomb, you knew all about megatons and bubble diameters. So what’s going on?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. Really.” Lubin shakes his head. “I do have⁠—expertise, in certain kinds of operations. Why should that surprise you? Did you really think domestic violence was the only kind that would qualify someone for this job?”</p>
			<p>There’s a silence. “I don’t believe you,” Clarke says at last.</p>
			<p>“That’s your prerogative,” Lubin says, almost sadly.</p>
			<p>“And why,” she asks, “did you come <i>back</i>?”</p>
			<p>“Just now?” Lubin shrugs. “I wanted⁠—I wanted to say I’m sorry. About Karl.”</p>
			<p>“Karl? Yeah. Me too. But that’s over and done with.”</p>
			<p>“He really cared about you, Lenie. He would have come back eventually. I know that.”</p>
			<p>She looks at him curiously. “What do you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But I’m conditioned for tight security, you see, and Acton could see right inside. All the things I did⁠ ⁠… before. He could see it, there wasn’t⁠—”</p>
			<p><i>Acton could see⁠—</i> “Ken. We’ve never been able to tune you in. You know that.”</p>
			<p>He nods, rubbing his hands together. In the dim blue light Clarke can see sweat beading on his forehead.</p>
			<p>“We get this training,” he says, his voice barely a whisper. “Ganzfeld interrogation’s a standard tool in corporate and national arsenals, you’ve got to be able to⁠—to block the signals. I could, mostly, with you people. Or I’d just stay away so it wouldn’t be a problem.”</p>
			<p><i>What is he saying</i>, Lenie Clarke asks herself, already knowing. <i>What is he saying?</i></p>
			<p>“But Karl, he just⁠—he dropped his inhibitors way too⁠—I couldn’t keep him out.”</p>
			<p>He rubs his face. Clarke has never seen him so fidgety.</p>
			<p>“You know that feeling you get,” Lubin says, “when you get caught with your hand in the cookie jar? Or in bed with someone else’s lover? There’s a formula for it. Some special combination of neurotransmitters. When you feel, you know, you’ve been⁠—found out.”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Oh my God.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“I’ve got a⁠—sort of a conditioned reflex,” he tells her. “It kicks in whenever those chemicals build up. I don’t really have control over it. And when I feel, down in my gut, that I’ve been <i>discovered</i>, I just⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>Five percent,</i> Acton told her, long ago. <i>Maybe ten. If you keep it that low you’ll be okay.</i></p>
			<p>“I don’t really have a choice⁠ ⁠…” Lubin says.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Five or ten percent. No more.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“I thought⁠—I thought he was just worried about calcium depletion,” Clarke whispers.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry.” Lubin doesn’t move at all, now. “I thought, coming down here⁠—I thought it’d be safest for everyone, you know? It would have been, if Karl hadn’t⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She looks at him, numbed and distant. “How can you tell me this, Ken? Doesn’t this, this <i>confession</i> of yours constitute a security breach?”</p>
			<p>He stands up, suddenly. For a moment she thinks he’s going to kill her.</p>
			<p>“No,” he says.</p>
			<p>“Because your gut tells you I’m as good as dead anyway,” she says. “Whatever happens. So no harm done.”</p>
			<p>He turns away. “I’m sorry,” he says again, starting down the ladder.</p>
			<p>Her own body seems very far away. But a small, hot coal is growing in all that dead space.</p>
			<p>“What if I changed my mind, Ken?” she calls after him, rising. “What if I decided to leave with the rest of you? That’d get the old killer reflex going, wouldn’t it?”</p>
			<p>He stops on the ladder. “Yes,” he says at last. “But you won’t.”</p>
			<p>She stands completely still, watching him. He doesn’t even look back.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She’s outside. This isn’t part of the plan. The plan is to stay inside, like they told her to. The plan is to sit there, just asking for it.</p>
			<p>But here she is at the Throat, swimming along Main Street. The generators loom over her like sheltering giants. She bathes in their warm sodium glow, passes through clouds of flickering microbes, barely noticed. Beneath her, monstrous benthos filter life from the water, as oblivious to her as she is to them. Once she passes a multicolored starfish, beautifully twisted, stitched together from leftovers. It lies folded back against itself, two arms facing upward; a few remaining tube feet wave feebly in the current. Cottony fungus thrives in a jagged patchwork of seams.</p>
			<p>At the edge of the smoker her thermistor reads 54°C.</p>
			<p>It tells her nothing. The smoker could sleep for a hundred years or go off in the next second. She tries to tune in to the bottom-dwellers, glean whatever instinctive insights Acton could steal, but she’s never been sensitive to invertebrate minds. Perhaps that skill comes only to those who’ve crossed the ten-percent threshold.</p>
			<p>She’s never risked going down this one before.</p>
			<p>It’s a tight fit. The inside of the chimney grabs her before she gets three meters. She twists and squirms; soft chunks of sulfur and calcium break free from the walls. She inches down, headfirst. Her arms are pinned over her head like black jointed antenna. There’s no room to keep them at her sides.</p>
			<p>She’s plugging the vent so tightly that no light can filter in from Main Street. She trips her headlight on. A flocculent snowstorm swirls in the beam.</p>
			<p>A meter further down, the tunnel zigs right. She doesn’t think she’ll be able to navigate the turn. Even if she can, she knows the passage is blocked. She knows, because a lime-encrusted skeletal foot protrudes around the corner.</p>
			<p>She wriggles forward. There’s a sudden roaring, and for one paralyzed moment she thinks the smoker is starting to blow. But the roar is in her head; something’s plugging her electrolyser intake, depriving her of oxygen. It’s only Lenie Clarke, passing out.</p>
			<p>She shakes back and forth, a spasm centimeters in amplitude. It’s enough; her intake is clear again. And as an added bonus, she’s gotten far enough to see around the corner.</p>
			<p>Acton’s boiled skeleton clogs the passageway, crusty with mineral deposits. Blobs of melted copolymer stick to the remains like old candle wax. Somewhere in there, at least one piece of human technology is still working, screaming back to Beebe’s deafened sensors.</p>
			<p>She can’t reach him. She can barely even touch him. But somehow, even through the encrustations, she can see that his neck has been neatly snapped.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
