<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Housecleaning</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Housecleaning</h4>
			<p>
				<i>So. They say you’re a beater.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Lubin stands in front of her, his duffel bag at his feet. Slavic; dark hair, pale skin, a face planed out by an underskilled woodworker. One thick eyebrow shading both eyes. Not tall⁠—a hundred and eighty centimeters, maybe⁠—but solid.</p>
			<p>
				<i>You look like a beater.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Scars. Not just on the wrists, on the face too. Very faint, a webwork echo of old injuries. Too subtle for deliberate decoration, even if Lubin’s tastes run to that, but too obvious for reconstructive work; medical technology learned how to erase such telltales decades ago. Unless⁠—unless the injuries were <i>really</i> bad.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Is that it? Did something chew your face down to the bone, a long time ago?</i>
			</p>
			<p>Lubin reaches down, picks up his bag. His covered eyes betray nothing.</p>
			<p>
				<i>I’ve known beaters in my day. You fit. Sort of.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Any preference which cubby I take?” he asks. It’s strange, hearing that voice coming out of a face like his. It sounds almost pleasant.</p>
			<p>Clarke shakes her head. “I’m second on the right. Take any of the others.”</p>
			<p>He steps past her. Daggers of reflective glass protrude from the edges of the far wall; within them, Lubin’s fractured image disappears into the corridor at Clarke’s back. She moves across the lounge to that jagged wall. <i>I should really clean this up one of these days⁠ ⁠…</i></p>
			<p>She used to like the way the mirror’s worked since Ballard’s adjustments. The jigsaw reflections seem more creative, somehow. More impressionistic. Now, though, they’re beginning to wear on her. Maybe it’s time for another change.</p>
			<p>A piece of Ken Lubin stares at her from the wall. Without thinking, she drives her fist into the glass. A shower of fragments tinkles to the floor.</p>
			<p>
				<i>You could be a beater. Just try it. Just fucking try it.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Oh,” Lubin says, behind her. “I⁠—”</p>
			<p>There’s still enough mirror left to check; her face is free of any expression. She turns to face him.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry if I startled you,” Lubin says quietly, and withdraws.</p>
			<p>He does seem sorry, at that.</p>
			<p><i>So. You’re not a beater.</i> Clarke leans against the bulkhead. <i>At least, not my kind of beater.</i> She’s not exactly sure how she knows. There’s some vital chemistry missing between them. Lubin, she thinks, is a very dangerous man. Just not to her.</p>
			<p>She smiles to herself. <i>Beating means never having to say you’re sorry.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>Until it’s too late, of course.</i>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She’s tired enough of sharing the cubby with herself. Sharing it with someone else is something she likes even less.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke lies on her bunk and scans the length of her own body. Past her toes, another Lenie Clarke stares coolly back. The jumbled topography of the forward bulkhead frames her reflected face like a tabletop junkyard turned on edge.</p>
			<p>The camera behind that mirror must see the same thing she does, but distorted around the edges. Clarke figures on a wide-angle lens; the GA wouldn’t want to leave the corners out of range. What’s the point of running an experiment if you can’t keep tabs on your subject animals?</p>
			<p>She wonders if anyone’s watching her now. Probably not; at least, nobody human. They’ll have some machine, tireless and dispassionate, something that watches with relentless attention as she works or shits or gets herself off. It will be programmed to call flesh and blood if she does anything interesting.</p>
			<p><i>Interesting.</i> Who defines that parameter? Is it strictly in keeping with the nature of the experiment, or has someone programmed more personal tastes on the side? Does anyone else get off when Lenie Clarke does?</p>
			<p>She twists on the bed and faces the headboard bulkhead. A spaghetti bundle of optical filaments erupts from the floor beside her pallet and crawls up the middle of the wall, disappearing into the ceiling; the seismic feeds, on their way to the communications cubby. The air conditioning inlet sighs across her cheek, just to one side. Behind it, a metal iris catches strips of light sectioned by the grating, ready to sphincter shut the moment delta-p exceeds some critical number of millibars per second. Beebe is a mansion with many rooms, each potentially self-isolating in case of emergency.</p>
			<p>Clarke lies back on the bunk and lets her fingers drop to the deck. The telemetry cartridge on the floor is almost dry now, fine runnels of salt crusting its surface as the seawater evaporates. It’s a basic broad-spectrum model, studded with half a dozen senses: seismic, temperature, flow, the usual sulfates and organics. Sensor heads disfigure its housing like the spikes on a mace.</p>
			<p>Which is why it’s here, now.</p>
			<p>She closes her fingers around the carrying handle, lifts the cartridge off the deck. Heavy. Neutrally buoyant in seawater, of course, but 9.5 kilos in atmosphere according to the specs. Mostly pressure casing, very tough. An active smoker at five hundred atmospheres wouldn’t touch it.</p>
			<p>Maybe it’s a bit of overkill, sending it up against one lousy mirror. Ballard started the job with her bare hands, after all.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Odd that they didn’t make them shatterproof.</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>But convenient.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Clarke sits up, hefting the cartridge. Her reflection looks back at her; its eyes, blank but not empty, seem somehow amused.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ms.</abbr> Clarke? You okay?” It’s Lubin. “I heard⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I’m fine,” she says to the sealed hatch. There’s glass all over the cubby. One stubborn shard, half a meter long, hangs in its frame like a loose tooth. She reaches out (mirror fragments tumble off her thighs) and taps it with one hand. It crashes to the deck and shatters.</p>
			<p>“Just housecleaning,” she calls.</p>
			<p>Lubin says nothing. She hears him move away up the corridor.</p>
			<p>He’s going to work out fine. It’s been a few days now and he’s been scrupulous about keeping his distance. There’s no sexual chemistry at all, nothing to set them at each other’s throats. Whatever Ken Lubin did to Lana Cheung⁠—whatever those two did to each other⁠—won’t be an issue here. Lubin’s tastes are too specific.</p>
			<p>For that matter, so are Clarke’s.</p>
			<p>She stands up, head bent to avoid the metal encrustations on the ceiling. Glass crunches under her feet. The bulkhead behind the mirror, freshly exposed, looks oily in the fluorescent light; a ribbed gray face with only two distinguishing features. The first is a spherical lens, smaller than a fingernail, tucked up in one corner. Clarke pulls it from its socket, holds it between thumb and forefinger for a second. A tiny glass eyeball. She drops it to the glittering deck.</p>
			<p>There’s also a name, stamped into one of the alloy ribs: <i>Hansen Fabrication</i>.</p>
			<p>It’s the first time she’s seen see a brand name since she arrived here, except for the GA logos pressed into the shoulders of their diveskins. That seems odd, somehow. She checks the lightstrip running the length of the ceiling; white and featureless. An emergency hydrox tank next to the hatch: DOT test date, pressure specs, but no manufacturer.</p>
			<p>She doesn’t know if she should attach any significance to this.</p>
			<p>Alone, now. Hatch sealed, surveillance ended⁠—even her own reflection shattered beyond repair. For the first time, Lenie Clarke feels a sense of real safety here in the station’s belly. She doesn’t quite know what to do with it.</p>
			<p><i>Maybe I could let my guard down a bit.</i> Her hands go to her face.</p>
			<p>At first she thinks she’s gone blind; the cubby seems so dark to her uncapped eyes, walls and furniture receding into mere suggestions of shadow. She remembers turning the lights down in increments in the days since Ballard’s departure, darkening this room, darkening every other corner of Beebe Station. Lubin’s been doing it too, although they never talk about it.</p>
			<p>For the first time she wonders at their actions. It doesn’t make sense; eyecaps compensate automatically for changes in ambient light, always serve up the same optimum intensity to the retina. Why choose to live in a darkness you don’t even perceive?</p>
			<p>She nudges the lights up a bit; the cubby brightens. Bright colors jar the eye against a background of gray on gray. The hydrox tank reflects fluorescent orange; readouts wink red and blue and green; the handle on the bulkhead locker is a small exclamation of yellow. She can’t remember the last time she noticed color; eyecaps draw the faintest images from darkness, but most of the spectrum gets lost in the process. Only now, when the lights are up, can color reassert itself.</p>
			<p>She doesn’t like it. It seems raw and out of place down here. Clarke puts her eyecaps back in, dims the lights to their usual minimal glow. The bulkhead fades to a comforting wash of blue pastels.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Just as well. Shouldn’t get too careless anyway.</i>
			</p>
			<p>In a couple of days Beebe will be crawling with a full staff. She doesn’t want to get used to exposing herself.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
