<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Ghosts</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-1" id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Ghosts</h4>
			<p>It’s hideous.</p>
			<p>Nearly a meter across. Probably smaller when Clarke started working on it, but it’s a real monster now. Scanlon thinks back to his v-school days, and remembers: starfish are supposed to be all in one plane. Flat disks with arms. Not this one. Clarke has grafted bits and pieces together at all angles and produced a crawling Gordian knot, some pieces red, some purple, some white. Scanlon thinks the original body may have been orange, before.</p>
			<p>“They regenerate,” she buzzes at his shoulder. “And they’ve got really primitive immune systems, so there’s no tissue rejection problems to speak of. It makes them easier to fix if something goes wrong with them.”</p>
			<p><i>Fix.</i> As if this is actually some sort of improvement. “So, it was broken?” Scanlon asks. “What was wrong with it, exactly?”</p>
			<p>“It was scratched. It had this cut on its back. And there was another starfish nearby, all torn up. Way too far gone for even me to help, but I figured I could use some of the pieces to patch this little guy together.”</p>
			<p>This little guy. <i>This little guy</i> drags itself around between them in slow pathetic circles, leaving tangled tracks in the mud. Filaments of parasitic fungus trail from ragged seams, not quite healed. Extra limbs, asymmetrically grafted, catch on rocks; the body lurches, perpetually unstable.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke doesn’t seem to notice.</p>
			<p>“How long ago⁠—I mean, how long have you been doing this?”</p>
			<p>Scanlon’s voice is admirably level; he’s certain it conveys nothing but friendly interest. But somehow she knows. She’s silent for a second, and then she points her undead eyes at him and she says, “Of course. It makes you sick.”</p>
			<p>“No, I’m just⁠—well, fascinated, I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You’re disgusted,” she buzzes. “You shouldn’t be. Isn’t this exactly the sort of thing you’d expect from a rifter? Isn’t that why you sent us down here in the first place?”</p>
			<p>“I know what you think, Lenie,” Scanlon tries, going for the light touch. “You think we get up every morning and ask ourselves, How can we best fuck over our employees today?”</p>
			<p>She looks down at the starfish. “We?”</p>
			<p>“The GA.”</p>
			<p>She floats there while her pet monster squirms in slow motion, trying to right itself.</p>
			<p>“We’re not evil, Lenie,” Scanlon says after a while. If only she’d look at him, see the earnest expression on his helmeted face. He’s practiced it for years.</p>
			<p>But when she does look up, finally, she doesn’t even seem to notice. “Don’t flatter yourself, Scanlon,” she says. “You don’t have the slightest control over what you are.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/280850:1043</p>
			<p>There’s no doubt that the ability to function down here stems from attributes which would, under other conditions, qualify as “dysfunctional.” These attributes not only permit long-term exposure to the rift; they may also intensify as a <i>result</i> of that exposure. Lenie Clarke, for example, has developed a mutilation neurosis which she could not have had prior to her arrival here. Her fascination with an animal which can be easily “fixed” when broken has fairly obvious roots, notwithstanding a number of horribly botched attempts at “repair.” Judith Caraco, who used to run indoor marathons prior to her arrest, compulsively swims up and down Beebe’s transponder line. The other participants have probably developed corresponding habits.</p>
			<p>Whether these behaviors are indicative of a physiological addiction I can not yet say. If they are, I suspect that Kenneth Lubin may be the furthest along. During conversation with some of the other participants I have learned that Lubin may actually <i>sleep</i> outside on occasion, which can not be considered healthy by anyone’s standards. I would be better able to understand the reason for this if I had more particulars about Lubin’s background. Of course, his file as provided is missing certain relevant details.</p>
			<p>On the job, the participants work unexpectedly well together, given the psychological baggage each of them carries. Duty shifts carry an almost uncanny sense of coordination. They seem choreographed. It’s almost as if⁠—</p>
			<p>This is a subjective impression, of course, but I believe that rifters do in fact share some heightened awareness of each other, at least when they’re outside. They may also have a heightened awareness of <i>me</i>⁠—either that, or they’ve made some remarkably shrewd guesses about my state of mind.</p>
			<p>No. Too, too⁠—</p>
			<p>Too easy to misinterpret. If the haploids back on shore read that, they might think the vampires have the upper hand. Scanlon deletes the last few lines, considers alternatives.</p>
			<p>There’s a word for his suspicions. It’s a word that describes your experience in an isolation tank, or in VR with all the inputs blanked, or⁠—in extreme cases⁠—when someone cuts the sensory cables of your central nervous system. It describes that state of sensory deprivation in which whole sections of the brain go dark for want of input. The word is Ganzfeld.</p>
			<p>It’s very quiet in a Ganzfeld. Usually the temporal and occipital lobes seethe with input, signals strong enough to swamp any competition. When those fall silent, though, the mind can sometimes make out faint whispers in the darkness. It imagines scenes that have a curious likeness to those glowing on a television in some distant room, perhaps. Or it feels a faint emotional echo, familiar but not, somehow, firsthand.</p>
			<p>Statistics suggest that these sensations are not entirely imaginary. Experts of an earlier decade⁠—people much like Yves Scanlon, except for their luck in being in the right place at the right time⁠—have even found out where the whispers come from.</p>
			<p>It turns out that protein microtubules, permeating each and every neuron, act as receivers for certain weak signals at the quantum level. It turns out that consciousness itself is a quantum phenomenon. It turns out that under certain conditions conscious systems can interact directly, bypassing the usual sensory middlemen.</p>
			<p>Not a bad payoff for something that started a hundred years ago with halved ping-pong balls taped over someone’s eyes.</p>
			<p>Ganzfeld. That’s the ticket. Don’t talk about the ease with which these creatures stare through you. Forget the endpoint: dissect the process.</p>
			<p>Take control.</p>
			<p>I believe some sort of Ganzfeld Effect may be at work here. The dark, weightless abyssal environment might impoverish the senses enough to push the signal-to-noise ratio past threshold. My observations suggest that the women may be more sensitive than the men, which is consistent given their larger corpus callosa and consequent advantage in intercortical processing speed..</p>
			<p>Whatever the cause of this phenomenon, it has yet to affect me. Perhaps it just takes a little time.</p>
			<p>Oh, one other thing. I was unable to find any record of Karl Acton using the medical scanner. I’ve asked Clarke and Brander about this, neither could remember Acton actually using the machine. Given the number of injuries on record for everyone else, I find this surprising.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Yves Scanlon sits at the table and forces himself to eat with a mouth gone utterly dry. He hears the vampires moving downstairs, moving along the corridor, moving just behind him. He doesn’t turn around. He mustn’t show any weakness. He can’t betray any lack of confidence.</p>
			<p>Vampires, he knows now, are like dogs. They can smell fear.</p>
			<p>His head is full of sampled sounds, looping endlessly. <i>You’re not among friends here, Scanlon. Don’t make us into enemies.</i> That was Brander, five minutes ago, whispering in Scanlon’s ear before dropping down into the wetroom. And Caraco <i>click click clicking</i> her bread knife against the table until he could barely hear himself think. And Nakata and that stupid <i>giggle</i> of hers. And Patricia Rowan, sometime in the imagined future, sneering <i>Well if you can’t even handle a routine assignment without starting a revolt it’s no wonder we didn’t trust you⁠ ⁠…</i></p>
			<p>Or perhaps, echoing back along a different timeline, a terse call to the GA: <i>We lost Scanlon. Sorry.</i></p>
			<p>And underlying it all, that long, hollow, icy sound, slithering along the floor of his brain. That thing. That thing that nobody mentions. The voice in the abyss. It sounds nearby tonight, whatever it is.</p>
			<p>Not that that matters to the vampires. They’re sealing their ‘skins while Scanlon sits frozen at the end of his meal, they’re grabbing their fins, dropping outside in ones and twos, deserting him. They’re going out there, with the moaning thing.</p>
			<p>Scanlon wonders, over the voices in his head, if it can get inside. If this is the night they bring it back with them.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The vampires are all gone. After a while, even the voices in Scanlon’s head start to fade. Most of them.</p>
			<p>
				<i>This is insane. I can’t just sit here.</i>
			</p>
			<p>There’s one voice he didn’t hear tonight. Lenie Clarke just sat there through the whole fiasco, watching. Clarke’s the one they look to, all right. She doesn’t talk much, but they pay attention when she does. Scanlon wonders what she tells them, when he’s not around.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Can’t just sit here. And it’s not that bad. It’s not as though they really threatened me⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>You’re not among friends here, Scanlon.</i>
			</p>
			<p>—<i>not explicitly.</i></p>
			<p>He tries to figure out exactly where he lost them. It seemed like a reasonable enough proposition. The prospect of shorter tours shouldn’t have put them off like that. Even if they are addicted to this godawful place, it was just a <i>suggestion</i>. Scanlon went out of his way to be completely nonthreatening. Unless they took exception to his mention of their carelessness in the safety department. But that should have been old news; they not only knew the chances they were taking, they flaunted them.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Who am I kidding? That’s not when I lost them. I shouldn’t have mentioned Lubin, shouldn’t have used him as an example.</i>
			</p>
			<p>It made so much sense at the time, though. Scanlon <i>knows</i> Lubin’s an outsider, even down here. Scanlon’s not an idiot, he can read the signs even behind the eyecaps. Lubin’s different from the other vampires. Using him as an example should have been the safest thing in the world. Scapegoats have been a respected part of the therapeutic arsenal for hundreds of years.</p>
			<p><i>Look, you want to end up like Lubin? He sleeps</i> outside, <i>for Christ’s sake!</i></p>
			<p>Scanlon puts his head in his hands. <i>How was I supposed to know they</i> all <i>did?</i></p>
			<p>Maybe he should have. He could have monitored sonar more closely. Or timed them when they went into their cubbies, seen how long they stayed inside. There were things he could have done, he knows.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Maybe I really did fuck up. Maybe. If only I’d⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p><i>Jesus, that sounds close. What</i> is⁠—</p>
			<p><i>Shut up! Just shut the fuck</i> up!</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Maybe it shows up on sonar.</p>
			<p>Scanlon takes a breath and ducks into Comm. He’s had basic training on the gear, of course; it’s all pretty intuitive anyway. He didn’t really need Clarke’s grudging tutorial. A few seconds’ effort elicits a tactical overview: vampires, strung like beads on an invisible line between Beebe and the Throat. Another one off to the west, heading for the Throat; probably Lubin. Random topography. Nothing else.</p>
			<p>As he watches, the four icons closest to Beebe edge a pixel or two closer to Main Street. The fifth in line is way out ahead, almost as far out as Lubin. Nearly at the Throat already.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Wait a second.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Vampires: Brander, Caraco, Clarke, Lubin, Nakata. Right.</p>
			<p>Icons: one, two, three, four, five⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<i>Six.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Scanlon stares at the screen. <i>Oh shit.</i></p>
			<p>Beebe’s phone link is very old-school; a direct line, not even routed through the telemetry and comm servers. It’s almost Victorian in its simplicity, guaranteed to stay online through any systems crash short of an implosion. Scanlon has never used it before. Why should he? The moment he calls home he’s admitting he can’t do the job by himself.</p>
			<p>Now he hits the call stud without a moment’s hesitation. “This is Scanlon, Human Resources. I’ve got a bit of a⁠—”</p>
			<p>The line stays dark.</p>
			<p>He tries again. Dead.</p>
			<p><i>Shit shit shit.</i> Somehow, though, he isn’t surprised.</p>
			<p><i>I could call the vampires. I could order them to come back in. I have the authority.</i> It’s an amusing thought for a few moments.</p>
			<p>At least the Voice seems to have faded. He thinks he can hear it, if he concentrates, but it’s so faint it could even be his imagination.</p>
			<p>Beebe squeezes down on him. He looks back at the tactical display, hopefully. <i>One, two, three, f⁠—</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>Oh shit.</i>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He doesn’t remember going outside. He remembers struggling into his preshmesh, and picking up a sonar pistol, and now he’s on the seabed, under Beebe. He takes a bearing, checks it, checks it again. It doesn’t change.</p>
			<p>He creeps away from the light, towards the Throat. He fights with himself for endless moments, wins; his headlamp stays doused. No sense in broadcasting his presence.</p>
			<p>He swims blind, hugging the bottom. Every now and then he takes a bearing, resets his course. Scanlon zigzags across the sea floor. Eventually the abyss begins to lighten before him.</p>
			<p>Something moans, directly ahead.</p>
			<p>It doesn’t sound lonely any more. It sounds cold and hungry and utterly inhuman. Scanlon freezes like a night creature caught in headlights.</p>
			<p>After a while the sound goes away.</p>
			<p>The Throat glimmers half-resolved, maybe twenty meters ahead. It looks like a spectral collection of buildings and derricks set down on the moon. Murky copper lights spills down from floods set halfway up the generators. Scanlon circles, just beyond the light.</p>
			<p>Something moves, off to the left.</p>
			<p>An alien sigh.</p>
			<p>He flattens down onto the bottom, eyes closed. <i>Grow up, Scanlon. Whatever it is, it can’t hurt you. Nothing can bite through preshmesh.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>Nothing flesh and blood⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>He refuses to finish the thought. He opens his eyes.</p>
			<p>When it moves again, Scanlon is staring right at it.</p>
			<p>A black plume, jetting from a chimney of rock on the seabed. And this time it doesn’t just sigh; it <i>moans</i>.</p>
			<p>A smoker. That’s all it is. Acton went down one of those.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Maybe this one⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>The eruption peters out. The sound whispers away.</p>
			<p>Smokers aren’t supposed to make sounds. Not like that, anyway.</p>
			<p>Scanlon edges up to the lip of the chimney. 501C. Inside, anchored about two meters down, is some sort of machine. It’s been built out of things that were never meant to fit together; rotary blades spinning in the vestigial current, perforated tubes, pipes anchored at haphazard angles. The smoker is crammed with junk.</p>
			<p>And somehow, the water jets through it and comes out singing. Not a ghost. Not an alien predator, after all. Just⁠—windchimes. Relief sweeps through Scanlon’s body in a chemical wave. He relaxes, soaking in the sensation, until he remembers:</p>
			<p>
				<i>Six contacts. Six.</i>
			</p>
			<p>And here he is, floodlit, in full view.</p>
			<p>Scanlon retreats back into darkness. The machinery behind his nightmares, exposed and almost pedestrian, has bolstered his confidence. He resumes his patrol. The Throat rotates slowly to his right, a murky monochrome graphic.</p>
			<p>Something fades into view ahead, floating above an outcropping of featherworms. Scanlon slips closer, hides behind a convenient piece of rock.</p>
			<p>Vampires. Two of them.</p>
			<p>They don’t look the same.</p>
			<p>Vampires usually look alike out here, it’s almost impossible to tell them apart. But Scanlon’s sure he’s never seen one of these two before. It’s facing away from him, but there’s still something⁠—it’s too tall and thin, somehow. It moves in furtive starts and twitches, almost birdlike. Reptilian. It carries something under one arm.</p>
			<p>Scanlon can’t tell what sex it is. The other vampire, though, looks female. The two of them hang in the water a few meters apart, facing each other. Every now and then the female gestures with her hands; sometimes she moves too suddenly and the other one jumps a little, as if startled.</p>
			<p>He clicks through the voice channels. Nothing. After a while the female reaches out, almost tentatively, and touches the reptile. There’s something almost gentle⁠—in an alien way⁠—about the way she does that. Then she turns and swims off into the darkness. The reptile stays behind, drifting slowly on its axis. Its face comes into view.</p>
			<p>Its hood seal is open. Its face is so pale that Scanlon can barely tell where skin ends and eyecaps begin; it almost looks as if this creature <i>has</i> no eyes.</p>
			<p>The thing under its arm is the shredded remains of one of Channer’s monster fish. As Scanlon watches, the reptile brings it up to its mouth and tears off a chunk. Swallows.</p>
			<p>The voice in the Throat moans in the distance, but the reptile doesn’t seem to notice.</p>
			<p>Its uniform has the usual GA logo stamped onto the shoulders. The usual name tag underneath.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Who⁠—?</i>
			</p>
			<p>Its blank empty face sweeps right past Scanlon’s hiding place without pausing. A moment later it’s facing away again.</p>
			<p>It’s all alone out there. It doesn’t <i>look</i> dangerous.</p>
			<p>Scanlon braces against his rock, pushes off. Water pushes back, slowing him instantly. The reptile doesn’t see him. Scanlon kicks. He’s only a few meters away when he remembers.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Ganzfeld Effect. What if there’s some Ganzfeld Effect down h⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>The reptile spins suddenly, staring directly at him.</p>
			<p>Scanlon lunges. Another split-second and he wouldn’t even have come close, but fortune smiles; he catches onto one of the creature’s fins as it dives away. Its other foot lashes back, bounces off the helmet. Again, lower down; Scanlon’s sonar pistol spins away from his belt.</p>
			<p>He hangs on. The reptile comes at him with both fists, utterly silent. Scanlon barely feels the blows through his preshmesh. He hits back with the familiar desperation of a childhood punching bag, cornered again, feeble self-defense his only option.</p>
			<p>Until it dawns on him that this time, somehow, it’s <i>working</i>.</p>
			<p>He’s not facing the neighborhood bully here. He’s not paying the price for careless eye contact with some australopithecine at the local drink’n’drug. He fighting a spindly little freak that’s trying to <i>get away</i>. From <i>him.</i> This guy is downright <i>feeble</i>.</p>
			<p>For the first time in his life, Yves Scanlon is winning a fight.</p>
			<p>His fist connects, a chain-mail mace. The enemy jerks and struggles. Scanlon grabs, twists, wrestles his quarry into an armlock. His victim flails around, utterly helpless.</p>
			<p>“You’re not going anywhere, friend.” Finally, a chance to try out that tone of easy contempt he’s been practicing since the age of seven. It sounds good. It sounds confident, in control. “Not until I find out just what the <i>fuck</i> is⁠—”</p>
			<p>The lights go out.</p>
			<p>The whole Throat goes dark, suddenly and without fuss. It takes a few seconds to blink away the afterimages; finally, in the extreme distance, Scanlon makes out a very faint gray glow. Beebe.</p>
			<p>It dies as he watches. The creature in his arms has grown very still.</p>
			<p>“Let him go, Scanlon.”</p>
			<p>“Clarke?” It might be Clarke. The vocoders don’t mask everything, there are subtle differences that Scanlon’s just beginning to recognize. “Is that you?” He gets his headlamp on, but no matter where he points it there’s nothing to see.</p>
			<p>“You’ll break his arms,” the voice says. <i>Clarke. Got to be.</i></p>
			<p>“I’m not that⁠—” <i>strong⁠—</i> “clumsy,” Scanlon says to the abyss.</p>
			<p>“You don’t have to be. His bones have decalcified.” A momentary silence. “He’s fragile.”</p>
			<p>Scanlon loosens his grip a bit. He twists back and forth, trying to catch sight of something. Anything. All that comes into view is his prisoner’s shoulder patch.</p>
			<p>Fischer.</p>
			<p><i>But he went missing⁠—</i> Scanlon counts back⁠—<i>seven months ago!</i></p>
			<p>“Let him <i>go</i>, cocksucker.” A different voice, this time. Brander’s.</p>
			<p>“<i>Now,</i>” it buzzes. “Or I’ll fucking <i>kill</i> you.”</p>
			<p><i>Brander?</i> Brander <i>actually defending a pedophile? How the hell did that happen?</i></p>
			<p>It doesn’t matter now. There are other things to worry about.</p>
			<p>“Where are you?” Scanlon calls out. “What are you so afraid of?” He doesn’t expect such an obvious goad to work. He’s just buying time, trying to delay the inevitable. He can’t just let Fischer <i>go</i>; he’s out of options the moment that happens.</p>
			<p>Something moves, just to the left. Scanlon spins; a flurry of motion out there, maybe a hint of limbs caught in the beam. Too many for one person. Then nothing.</p>
			<p><i>He tried to do it</i>, Scanlon realizes. <i>Brander just tried to kill me, and they held him back.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>For now.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Last chance, Scanlon.” Clarke again, close and invisible, as though she’s humming in his ear. “We don’t have to lay a hand on you, you know? We can just leave you here. You don’t let him go in ten seconds and I swear you’ll never find your way back. One.”</p>
			<p>“And even if you did,” adds another voice⁠—Scanlon doesn’t know who⁠—“we’d be waiting for you there.”</p>
			<p>“Two.”</p>
			<p>He checks the helmet dashboard laid out around his chin. The vampires have shut off Beebe’s homing beacon.</p>
			<p>“Three.”</p>
			<p>He checks his compass. The readout won’t settle. No surprise there; magnetic navigation is a joke on the rift.</p>
			<p>“Four.”</p>
			<p>“Fine,” Scanlon tries. “Leave me here. I don’t care. I’ll⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Five.”</p>
			<p>“⁠—just head for the surface. I can last for <i>days</i> in this suit.” <i>Sure. As if they’ll just let you float away with their⁠—what</i> is <i>Fischer to them, anyway? Pet? Mascot?</i></p>
			<p>“Six.”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Role model?</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Seven.”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Oh God. Oh God.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Eight.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Please</i>,” he whispers.</p>
			<p>“Nine.”</p>
			<p>He opens his arms. Fischer dives away into the dark.</p>
			<p>Stops.</p>
			<p>Turns back and hangs there in the water, five meters away.</p>
			<p>“Fischer?” Scanlon looks around. For all he can tell, they are the only two particles in the universe. “Can you understand me?”</p>
			<p>He extends his arm. Fischer starts, like a nervous fish, but doesn’t bolt.</p>
			<p>Scanlon scans the abyss. “Is this how you want to end up?” he calls out.</p>
			<p>Nobody answers.</p>
			<p>“You have any idea what seven months of sensory deprivation does to your mind? You think he’s even <i>close</i> to being human any more? Are you going to spend the rest of your lives rooting around here in the mud, eating worms? Is that what you want?”</p>
			<p>“What we want,” something buzzes from the darkness, “is to be left alone.”</p>
			<p>“That’s not going to happen. No matter what you do to me. You can’t stay down here forever.”</p>
			<p>Nobody bothers to disagree. Fischer continues to float before him, his head cocked to one side.</p>
			<p>“Listen, C⁠—Lenie. Mike. All of you.” The headlight beam sweeps back and forth, empty. “It’s just a <i>job</i>. It’s not a lifestyle.” But Scanlon knows that’s a lie. All these people were rifters long before the job existed.</p>
			<p>“They’ll come for you,” he says softly, and he doesn’t know whether it’s a threat or a warning.</p>
			<p>“Maybe we won’t be here,” the abyss replies at last.</p>
			<p><i>Oh, God.</i>“Look, I don’t know what’s happening down here, but you can’t <i>want</i> to stay here, nobody in their⁠—I mean⁠—Jesus, <i>where are you?</i>”</p>
			<p>No answer. Only Fischer.</p>
			<p>“This wasn’t how it was supposed to go,” Scanlon says, pleading.</p>
			<p>And then, “I never meant for⁠—I mean I didn’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>And then only “I’m <i>sorry</i>. I’m sorry⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>And then nothing at all, except the darkness.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Eventually the lights come back on, and Beebe beeps reassuringly on its designated channel. Gerry Fischer is gone by then; Scanlon isn’t sure when he left.</p>
			<p>He’s not sure the others were ever there. He swims back to Beebe, alone.</p>
			<p><i>They probably didn’t even hear me. Not really.</i> Which is a shame, because there at the end he was actually telling the truth.</p>
			<p>He wishes he could pity them. It should be easy; they hide in the dark, they hide behind their eyecaps as though photocollagen is some sort of general anesthetic. They warrant the pity of real people. But how can you pity someone who’s somehow better off than you are? How can you pity someone who, in some sick way, seems to be happy?</p>
			<p>How can you pity someone who scares you to death?</p>
			<p>
				<i>And besides, they walked all over me. I couldn’t control them at all. Have I made a single real choice since I came down?</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>Sure. I gave them Fischer, and they let me live.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Yves Scanlon wonders, briefly, how to put <i>that</i> into the official record without making himself look like a complete screwup.</p>
			<p>In the end, he doesn’t really care.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/300850:1043</p>
			<p>I have recently encountered evidence of⁠ ⁠… that is, I believe⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The behavior of Beebe Station personnel is distinctively⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>I have recently participated in a telling exchange with station personnel. I managed to avoid outright confrontation, although⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Ah, fuck it.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>T minus twenty minutes, and except for Yves Scanlon, Beebe is deserted.</p>
			<p>It’s been like this for the past couple of days. The vampires just don’t come inside much any more. Maybe they’re deliberately excluding him. Maybe they’re just reverting to their natural state. He can’t tell.</p>
			<p>It’s just as well. By now, the two sides have very little left to say to each other.</p>
			<p>The shuttle should be almost here. Scanlon summons his resolve: when they come, they’re not going to find him hiding in his cubby. He’s going to be in the lounge, in plain view.</p>
			<p>He takes a breath, holds it, listens. Beebe creaks and drips around him. No other sounds of life.</p>
			<p>He gets off the pallet and presses an ear against the bulkhead. Nothing. He undogs the cubby hatch, opens it a few centimeters, peers out.</p>
			<p>Nothing.</p>
			<p>His suitcase has been packed for hours. He grabs it off the deck, swings the hatch all the way open, and strides purposefully down the corridor.</p>
			<p>He sees the shadow just before he enters the lounge, a dim silhouette against the bulkhead. A part of him wants to turn and run back to his cubby, but it’s a much smaller part than it used to be. Most of him is just tired. He steps forward.</p>
			<p>Lubin is waiting there, standing motionless beside the ladder. He stares through Scanlon with eyes of solid ivory.</p>
			<p>“I wanted to say goodbye,” he says.</p>
			<p>Scanlon laughs. He can’t help it.</p>
			<p>Lubin watches impassively.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry,” Scanlon says. He doesn’t feel even slightly amused. “It’s just⁠—you never even said <i>hello</i>, you know?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Lubin says. “Well.”</p>
			<p>Somehow, there’s no sense of threat about him this time. Scanlon can’t quite understand why; Lubin’s background file is still full of holes, the rumors are still festering over Galápagos; even the other vampires keep their distance from this one. But none of that shows through right now. Lubin just stands there, shifting his weight from one foot to the other. He looks almost vulnerable.</p>
			<p>“So they’re going to be bringing us back early,” he says.</p>
			<p>“I honestly don’t know. It’s not my decision.”</p>
			<p>“But they sent you down to⁠—prepare the way. Like John the Baptist.”</p>
			<p>It’s a very strange analogy, coming from Lubin. Scanlon says nothing.</p>
			<p>“Did you⁠—didn’t they <i>know</i> we wouldn’t want to come back? Didn’t they count on it?”</p>
			<p>“It wasn’t like that.” But he wonders, more than ever, what the GA knew.</p>
			<p>Lubin clears his throat. He seems very much to want to say something, but doesn’t.</p>
			<p>“I found the windchimes,” Scanlon says at last.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“They scared the hell out of me.”</p>
			<p>Lubin shakes his head. “That’s not what they were for.”</p>
			<p>“What <i>were</i> they for?”</p>
			<p>“Just⁠—a hobby, really. We’ve all got hobbies here. Lenie does her starfish. Alice⁠—dreams. This place has a way of taking ugly things and lighting them in a certain way, so they almost look beautiful.” A shrug. “I build memorials.”</p>
			<p>“Memorials.”</p>
			<p>Lubin nods. “The windchimes were for Acton.”</p>
			<p>“I see.”</p>
			<p>Something drops onto Beebe with a clank. Scanlon jumps.</p>
			<p>Lubin doesn’t react. “I’m thinking of building another set,” he says. “For Fischer, maybe.”</p>
			<p>“Memorials are for dead people. Fischer’s still alive.” <i>Technically, anyway.</i></p>
			<p>“Okay then. I’ll make them for you.”</p>
			<p>The overhead hatch drops open. Scanlon grips his suitcase and starts to climb, one-handed.</p>
			<p>“Sir⁠—”</p>
			<p>Scanlon looks down, surprised.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—” Lubin stops himself. “We could have treated you better,” he says at last.</p>
			<p>Scanlon knows, somehow, that this is not what Lubin intended to say. He waits. But Lubin offers nothing more.</p>
			<p>“Thanks,” Scanlon says, and climbs out of Beebe forever.</p>
			<p>The chamber he rises into is wrong. He looks around, disoriented; this isn’t the usual shuttle. The passenger compartment is too small, the walls studded with an array of nozzles. Forward, the cockpit hatch is sealed. A strange face looks back through the porthole as the ventral hatch swings shut.</p>
			<p>“Hey⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The face disappears. The compartment resonates with the sound of metal mouths disengaging. A slight lurch and the ‘scaphe is rising free.</p>
			<p>A fine aerosol mist hisses from the nozzles. It stings Scanlon’s eyes. An unfamiliar voice reassures him from the cabin speaker. Nothing to worry about, it says. Just a routine precaution.</p>
			<p>Everything’s just fine.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
