<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Angel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-2" id="chapter-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Angel</h4>
			<p>The seabed is glowing. Cracks in the rock flicker comforting shades of orange, like hot coals, and he knows that's thermal; the scalding rivulets feel warm even through his 'skin, his thermister leaps around every time the current twitches. But there are places here where the rocks shine green, and others where they shine blue. He doesn't know whether to thank biology or geochemistry. All he knows is that it's beautiful. It's a city from high up, at night. It's a vid of the northern lights he saw once, only sharper and brighter. It's a brush fire in emeralds.</p>
			<p>In a way he's almost grateful to Brander. If it weren't for Brander he'd never have come upon this place. He'd be sitting in Beebe with the rest of them, hooked into the library or hiding in his cubby, safe and dry.</p>
			<p>But Beebe's no refuge with Brander inside. Beebe's a gauntlet. So today Fischer just stayed away when his shift ended, crawled off across the ocean floor, exploring. Now, somewhere far from the Throat, he discovers <i>real</i> sanctuary.</p>
			<p>Don't fall asleep, Shadow says. If you miss your shift again it'll just give him an excuse.</p>
			<p><i>So what? He won't find me out here. </i></p>
			<p>You can't stay outside forever. You've got to eat sometime.</p>
			<p><i>I know, I know. Be quiet.</i></p>
			<p>He's the only person to have ever seen this place. How long has it been here? How many millions of years has this little oasis been glowing peacefully in the night, a pocket universe all to itself?</p>
			<p>Lenie would like it out here, Shadow says.</p>
			<p><i>Yeah.</i></p>
			<p>A rattail cruises into view about half a meter up, its underside a jigsaw of reflected color. It thrashes once, suddenly; violent shivers run the length of its body. The water around it shimmers with heat distortion. The fish spins lopsidedly, tail-down, in the wake of the little eruption. Its body turns white in seconds, begins to fray at the edges.</p>
			<p>Four hundred eight degrees Centigrade: that's maximum recorded temperature for hot seeps on the Juan de Fuca rift. Fischer thinks back for the temperature rating on diveskin copolymer.</p>
			<p>One fifty.</p>
			<p>He sculls up into the water column a bit, just in case. As soon as he clears bottom clutter he feels the faint, regular tapping of Beebe's sonar against his insides.</p>
			<p>That's odd. This far out, he shouldn't be able to feel the signal, not unless they'd really cranked it up. And they wouldn't do <i>that</i> unless—</p>
			<p>He checks the time.</p>
			<p><i>Oh no. Not again.</i></p>
			<p>By the time he makes it back to the Throat they're halfway through stripping number four. They open a space on the line for him. Lenie doesn't want to hear his apologies. She doesn't want to talk to him at all. That hurts, but Fischer can't really blame her. Maybe he can make it up to her soon. Maybe he can take her sightseeing.</p>
			<p>It's not Brander's shift, thank God. He's back at Beebe. But Fischer's getting hungry again.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p><i>Maybe he's in his cubby. Maybe I can just eat and go to bed. Maybe— </i></p>
			<p>He's sitting right there, all alone in the lounge, glaring up from his meal as soon as Fischer climbs into the room.</p>
			<p>Don't get him mad.</p>
			<p><i>Too late. He's</i> always <i>mad.</i></p>
			<p>"I— thought we should clear some things up," he tries.</p>
			<p>"Fuck off."</p>
			<p>Fischer reaches the galley table, pulls out a chair.</p>
			<p>"Don't bother," Brander says.</p>
			<p>"Look, this place is small enough as it is. We've got to at least <i>try</i> to get along, you know? I mean, that's <i>assault</i>. It's <i>illegal</i>."</p>
			<p>"So arrest me."</p>
			<p>"Maybe you're not really mad at me at all," Fischer stops for a moment, surprised. <i>Maybe that's it.</i> "Maybe you've mixed me up with someone—"</p>
			<p>Brander stands up.</p>
			<p>Fischer pushes on: "Maybe someone <i>else</i> did something to you, once, and—"</p>
			<p>Brander comes around the table, very deliberately.</p>
			<p>"I haven't got you mixed up with anybody. I know exactly what you are."</p>
			<p>"No, you don't, we never even <i>saw</i> each other until a couple of weeks ago!" <i>Of course that's it. It's not me at all, it's someone else!</i> "Whatever happened to you­­—"</p>
			<p>"Is none of your fucking business, and if you say one more word I'll fucking <i>kill</i> you."</p>
			<p>Let's just go, Shadow pleads. Let's leave, this is only making things worse.</p>
			<p>But Fisher stands his ground. Suddenly everything seems so clear. "It wasn't me," he says quietly. "What happened— I'm sorry. But it wasn't me, you <i>know</i> it wasn't."</p>
			<p>For a moment he thinks he might actually be getting through. Brander's face untwists a little, the knots of flesh and eyebrow unkinking just a bit around those featureless white eyes, and Fischer can almost see that face wearing something other than rage.</p>
			<p>But then he feels something moving, it's his own arm reaching out <i>Shadow no you'll ruin everything</i> but Shadow's not listening, she's crooning Don't get him mad, don't get him mad don't get him mad—</p>
			<p>This is what you <i>do</i>.</p>
			<p>The growl starts low in Brander's throat, rising, like a distant wave pushed higher and higher out of the sea as it rushes shoreward.</p>
			<p>"...don't <i>you Fucking TOUCH ME!</i>"</p>
			<p>And nothing goes dead fast enough.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>It stings at first. Then he feels clotted blood break around his eyelid, sees a fuzzy line of red light. He tries to bring his hand to his face. It hurts.</p>
			<p>Something cold and wet, soothing. More clots come away.</p>
			<p>"Nnnnnn..."</p>
			<p>Someone is poking at his eyes. He tries to struggle, but all he can do is move his head feebly from side to side. That hurts even more.</p>
			<p>"Don't move."</p>
			<p>Lenie's voice.</p>
			<p>"Your right eyecap's damaged. It could be gouging your cornea."</p>
			<p>He relents. Lenie's fingers push between lids that feel as puffy as pillows. There's a sudden pressure on his eyeball, a tug of suction. A slurping sound, and the feel of ragged edges dragged across his pupil.</p>
			<p>The world goes dark. "Hang on," Lenie says. "I'll turn up the lights."</p>
			<p>There's still a reddish tinge to everything, but at least he can see.</p>
			<p>He's in his cubby. Lenie Clarke leans over him, a bit of glistening wet membrane in one hand.</p>
			<p>"You were lucky. He'd have ripped your costochondrals if your implants hadn't been packed in behind them." She drops the ruined cap out of sight, picks up a cartridge of liquid skin. "As it is, he only broke a couple of ribs. Lots of bruises. Mild concussion, maybe, but you'll have to go to Medical to be sure. Oh, and I'm pretty sure he broke your cheekbone too."</p>
			<p>She sounds as if she’s reading a grocery list.</p>
			<p>“Why not—” Warm salt floods his mouth. His tongue does some careful exploring; his teeth are still intact, at least. “—in Medical, now?”</p>
			<p>“It would have been a bitch getting you down the ladder. Brander wasn’t going to help. Everyone else is outside.” She sprays foam across his bicep. It pulls his skin as it dries.</p>
			<p>“Not that they’d be any help,” she adds.</p>
			<p>“Thanks...”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t do anything. Just dragged you in here, basically.”</p>
			<p>He wants desperately to touch her.</p>
			<p>“What is it with you, Fischer?” she asks after a while. "Why don't you ever fight back?"</p>
			<p>"Wouldn’t work."</p>
			<p>"Are you kidding? You know how <i>big</i> you are? You could take Brander apart if you just stood up to him."</p>
			<p><i>Shadow says it only makes things worse. You fight back, it only gets them madder.</i></p>
			<p>"Shadow?" Lenie says.</p>
			<p>"What?"</p>
			<p>"You said—"</p>
			<p>“Didn’t say anything...”</p>
			<p>She watches him for a few moments.</p>
			<p>"Okay," she says at last. She stands up. “I'll call up and send for a replacement."</p>
			<p>“No. That’s okay.”</p>
			<p>“You’re injured, Fischer."</p>
			<p>Medical tutorials whisper inside his head. “We've got stuff downstairs."</p>
			<p>"You still wouldn't be able to work for a week. More than twice that before you'd be fully healed."</p>
			<p>"They planned for accidents. When they set up the schedules."</p>
			<p>"And how are you going to keep clear of Brander until then?"</p>
			<p>"I'll stay outside more," he says. "Please, Lenie."</p>
			<p>She shakes her head. "You're crazy, Fischer." She turns to the hatch, undogs it. "None of my business, of course. I just don't think—"</p>
			<p>Turns back.</p>
			<p>“Do you like it down here?” she asks.</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“Do you get off, being down here?”</p>
			<p>It should be a stupid question. Especially now. Somehow it isn’t.</p>
			<p>“Sort of,” he says at last, realizing it for the first time.</p>
			<p>She nods, blinking over white space. “Dopamine rush.”</p>
			<p>“Dopa—?”</p>
			<p>“They say we get hooked on it. Being down here. Being— scared, I guess.” She smiles faintly. “That’s the rumor, anyway.”</p>
			<p>Fischer thinks about that. “Not so much I get off on it. More like, just used to it. You know?”</p>
			<p>“Yeah.” She turns and pushes the hatch open. “For sure.”</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>There's this praying mantis a meter long, all black with chrome trim, hanging upside-down from the ceiling of the medical cubby. It's been sleeping up there ever since Fischer first arrived. Now it hovers over his face, jointed arms clicking and dipping like crazy articulated chopsticks. Every now and then one of its feelers winks red light, and Fischer can smell the scent of his own flesh cauterizing. It kind of bothers him. What's even worse is, he can't move his head. The neuroinduction field in the Med table has got him paralyzed from the neck up. He keeps wondering what would happen if the focus slipped, if that damping energy ended up pointing at his lungs. At his <i>heart</i>.</p>
			<p>The mantis stops in midmotion, its antennae quivering. It keeps completely still for a few seconds. "Hello, er— Gerry, isn't it?" it says at last. "I'm Dr. Troyka."</p>
			<p>It sounds like a woman.</p>
			<p>"How are we doing here?" Fischer tries to answer, but his head and neck are still just so much dead meat. "No, don't try to answer," the mantis says, "Rhetorical question. I'm checking your readouts now."</p>
			<p>Fischer remembers: the medical equipment can't always do everything on its own. Sometimes, when things get too complicated, it calls up the line to a human backup.</p>
			<p>"Wow," says the mantis. "What happened to you? No, don't answer that either. I don't want to know." An accessory arm springs into sight and passes back and forth across Fischer's line of sight. "I'm going to override the damping field for a moment. It might hurt a bit. Try not to move when that happens, except to answer my questions."</p>
			<p>Pain floods across Fischer's face. It's not too bad. Familiar, even. His eyelids feel scratchy, and his tongue is dry. He tries blinking; it works. He closes his mouth, rubs his tongue against swollen cheeks. Better.</p>
			<p>"I don't suppose you want to come back up?" Dr. Troyka asks, hundreds of kilometers away. "You know these injuries are bad enough to warrant a recall."</p>
			<p>Fischer shakes his head. "That's okay. I can stay here."</p>
			<p>"Uh huh." The mantis doesn't sound surprised. "I've been hearing that a fair bit lately. Okay, I'm going to wire your cheekbone back together, and I'll be planting a little battery under your skin. Just below the right eye. It'll basically kick your bone cells into overdrive, speed up the healing process. It's just a couple of millimeters across, you'll feel like you've got sort of a hard pimple. It may itch, but try not to pick at it. When you're healed up you can just squeeze it out like a zit. Okay?"</p>
			<p>"Okay."</p>
			<p>"All right, Gerry. I'm going to turn the field back on and get to work." The mantis whirrs in anticipation.</p>
			<p>Fischer holds up a hand. "Wait."</p>
			<p>"What is it, Gerry?"</p>
			<p>"What...what time is it, up there?" he asks.</p>
			<p>"It's oh five ten. Pacific daylight. Why?"</p>
			<p>"It's early."</p>
			<p>"Sure is."</p>
			<p>"I guess I got you up," Fischer says. "Sorry."</p>
			<p>"Nonsense." Digits on the end of mechanical arms wiggle absently. "I've been up for hours. Graveyard shift."</p>
			<p>"Graveyard?"</p>
			<p>"We're on duty around the clock, Gerry. There's a lot of geothermal stations out there, you know. You— you keep us pretty busy, as a rule."</p>
			<p>"Oh," Fischer says. "Sorry."</p>
			<p>"Forget it. It's my job." There's a humming, somewhere in the back of his head; for a moment Fischer can feel the muscles of his face going slack. Then everything goes numb, and the mantis swoops down him like a predator.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>He knows better than to open up outside.</p>
			<p>It doesn't kill you, not right away. But seawater's a lot saltier than blood; let it inside and osmosis sucks the water from the epithelial cells, shrivels them down to viscous little blobs. Rifter kidneys are modified to speed up water reclamation when that happens, but it's not a long-term solution and it costs. Organs wears out faster, urine turns to oil. It's best to just keep sealed up. Your insides soak in seawater too long, they sort of <i>corrode</i>, implants or no implants.</p>
			<p>But that's another one of Fischer's problems. He never takes the long view.</p>
			<p>The face seal is a single macromolecule fifty centimeters long. It wraps back and forth along the line of the jaw like the two sides of a zipper, with hydrophobic side-chains for teeth. A little blade on the index of Fischer's left glove can split them apart. He runs it along the seal and the 'skin opens neatly around his mouth.</p>
			<p>He doesn't feel much of anything at first. He was half-expecting the ocean to charge up his nose and burn his sinuses, but of course all his body cavities are already packed with isotonic saline. The only immediate change is that his face gets cold, numbing the chronic ache of torn flesh a bit. Deeper pain pulses under one eye, where Dr. Troyka's wires hold the bones of his face together; microelectricity tingles along those lines, press-gangs bonebuilding osteoblasts into high gear.</p>
			<p>After a couple of moments he tries to gargle; that doesn't work, so he settles for gaping like a fish and wriggling his tongue around. That does it. He gets his first taste of raw ocean, coarse and saltier than the stuff that pumps him up inside.</p>
			<p>On the seabed in front of him, a swarm of blind shrimp feeds in the current from a nearby vent. Fischer can see right through them. They're like little chunks of glass with blobs of organs jiggling around inside.</p>
			<p>It must be fourteen hours since he's eaten, but there's no fucking way he's going back to Beebe with Brander still inside. The last time he tried, Brander was actually standing guard in the lounge, waiting for him.</p>
			<p><i>What the hell. It's just like krill. People eat this stuff all the time.</i></p>
			<p>They have a strange taste. Fischer's mouth is going numb from the cold, but there's still a faint sense of rotten eggs, dilute and barely detectable. Not bad other than that, though. Better than Brander by a long shot.</p>
			<p>When the convulsions hit fifteen minutes later, he's not so sure.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>"You look like shit," Lenie says.</p>
			<p>Fischer hangs onto the railing, looks around the lounge. "Where—"</p>
			<p>"At the Throat. On shift with Lubin and Caraco."</p>
			<p>He makes it to the couch.</p>
			<p>"Haven't seen you for a while," Lenie remarks. "How's your face doing?"</p>
			<p>Fischer squints at her through a haze of nausea. Lenie Clarke is actually making small talk. She's <i>never</i> done that before. He's still trying to figure out why when his stomach clamps down again and he pitches onto the floor. By now nothing comes up but a few dribbles of sour fluid.</p>
			<p>His eyes trace the pipes tangling along the ceiling. After a while Lenie's face blocks the view, looking down from a great height.</p>
			<p>"What's wrong?" She seems to be asking out of idle curiosity, no more.</p>
			<p>"Ate some shrimp," he says, and retches again.</p>
			<p>"You ate— from <i>outside</i>?" She bends down and pulls him up. His arms drag along behind on the deck. Something hard bumps his head; the railing around the downstairs ladder.</p>
			<p>"Fuck," Lenie says.</p>
			<p>He's on the floor again, alone. Receding footsteps. Dizziness. Something presses against his neck, pricks him with a soft hiss.</p>
			<p>His head clears almost instantly.</p>
			<p>Lenie's leaning in, closer than she's ever been. She's even touching him, she's got one hand on his shoulder. He stares down at that hand, feeling a stupid sort of wonder, but then she pulls it away.</p>
			<p>She's holding a hypo. Fischer's stomach begins to settle.</p>
			<p>"Why," she says softly, "would you do a stupid thing like that?"</p>
			<p>"I was hungry."</p>
			<p>"So what's wrong with the dispenser?"</p>
			<p>He doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>"Oh," Lenie says. "Right."</p>
			<p>She stands up and snaps the spent cartridge out of the hypo. "This can't go on, Fischer. You know that."</p>
			<p>"He hasn't got me in two weeks."</p>
			<p>"He hasn't <i>seen</i> you in two weeks. You only come in when he's on shift. And you're missing your own shifts more and more. Doesn't make you too popular with the rest of us." She cocks her head as Beebe creaks around them. "Why don't you just call up and get them to take you home?"</p>
			<p><i>Because I do things to children, and if I leave here they'll cut me open and change me into something else... </i></p>
			<p><i>Because there are things outside that almost make it worthwhile...</i></p>
			<p><i>Because of you...</i></p>
			<p>He doesn't know if she'd understand any of those reasons. He decides not to risk it.</p>
			<p>"Maybe you could talk to him," he manages.</p>
			<p>Lenie sighs. "He wouldn't listen."</p>
			<p>"Maybe if you tried, at least—"</p>
			<p>Her face hardens. "I <i>have</i> tried. I—"</p>
			<p>She catches herself.</p>
			<p>"I can't get involved," she whispers. "It's none of my business."</p>
			<p>Fischer closes his eyes. He feels as if he's going to cry. "He just doesn't let up. He really hates me."</p>
			<p>"It's not you. You're just— filling in."</p>
			<p>"Why did they put us together? It doesn't make sense!"</p>
			<p>"Sure it does. Statistically."</p>
			<p>Fischer opens his eyes. "What?"</p>
			<p>Lenie's pulling one hand down across her face. She seems very tired.</p>
			<p>"We're not people here, Fischer. We're a cloud of data points. Doesn't matter what happens to you or me or Brander, just as long as the mean stays where it's supposed to and the standard deviation doesn't get too big."</p>
			<p>Tell her, Shadow says.</p>
			<p>"Lenie—"</p>
			<p>"Anyway." Lenie shrugs the mood away. "You're crazy to eat anything that near a rift zone. Didn't you learn about hydrogen sulfide?"</p>
			<p>He nods. "Basic training. The vents spit it out."</p>
			<p>"And it builds up in the benthos. They're toxic. Which I guess you know now anyway."</p>
			<p>She starts down the ladder, stops on the second rung.</p>
			<p>"If you really want to go native, try feeding further from the rift. Or go for the fish."</p>
			<p>"The fish?"</p>
			<p>"They move around more. Don't spend all their time soaking in the hot springs. Maybe they're safe."</p>
			<p>"The fish," he says again. He hadn't thought of that.</p>
			<p>"I said <i>maybe</i>."</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p><i>Shadow I'm so sorry...</i></p>
			<p>Shush. Just look at all the pretty lights.</p>
			<p>So he looks. He knows this place. He's on the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. He's back in fairyland. He thinks he comes here a lot now, watches the lights and bubbles, listens to the deep rocks grinding against each other.</p>
			<p>Maybe he'll stay this time, watch the whole thing working, but then he remembers he's supposed to be somewhere else. He waits, but nothing specific comes to him. Just a feeling that he should be doing something somewhere else. Soon.</p>
			<p>It's getting harder to stay here anyway. There's a vague pain hanging around his upper body somewhere, fading in and out. After a while he realizes what it is. His face hurts.</p>
			<p>Maybe this beautiful light is hurting his eyes.</p>
			<p>That can't be right. His caps should take care of all that. Maybe they're not working. He seems to remember something that happened to his eyes a while back, but it doesn't really matter. He can always just leave. Suddenly, wonderfully, all of his problems have easy answers.</p>
			<p>If the light hurts, all he has to do is stay in the dark.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
