<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Autoclave</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-2" id="chapter-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Autoclave</h4>
			<p>Nakata nearly bumps into her at the base of the ladder. Clarke glares; Nakata moves aside, baring teeth in a submissive primate smile.</p>
			<p>Brander's in the lounge, pecking at the library: "You—?"</p>
			<p>"I'm fine." She isn't, but she's getting there. This anger is nowhere near critical mass; it's just a reflex, really, a spark budded off from the main reservoir. It decays exponentially with elapsed time. By the time she reaches her cubby she's almost feeling sorry for Fischer.</p>
			<p><i>Not his fault. He didn't mean any harm.</i></p>
			<p>She closes the hatch behind her. It's safe to hit something now, if she wants. She looks around half-heartedly for a target, finally just drops onto her bunk and stares at the ceiling.</p>
			<p>Someone raps on metal. "Lenie?"</p>
			<p>She rises, pushes at the hatch.</p>
			<p>"Hey Lenie, I think I've got a bad slave channel on one of the squids. I was wondering if you could—"</p>
			<p>"Sure." Clarke nods. "Fine. Only not right now, okay, um—"</p>
			<p>"Judy," says Caraco, sounding slightly miffed.</p>
			<p>"Right. Judy." In fact, Clarke hasn't forgotten. But Beebe's way too crowded these days. Lately Clarke's learned to lose the occasional name. It helps keep things comfortably distant.</p>
			<p>Sometimes.</p>
			<p>"Excuse me," she says, brushing past Caraco. "I've got to get outside."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In a few places, the rift is almost gentle.</p>
			<p>Usually the heat stabs up in boiling muddy pillars or jagged bolts of superheated liquid. Steam never gets a chance to form at three hundred atmospheres, but thermal distortion turns the water into a column of writhing liquid prisms, hotter than molten glass. Not here, though. In this one spot, nestled between lava pillows and safe from Beebe's prying ears, the heat wafts up through the mud like a soft breeze. The underlying bedrock must be porous.</p>
			<p>She comes here when she can, keeping to the bottom en route to foil Beebe's sonar. The others don't know about this place yet; she'd just as soon keep it that way. Sometimes she comes here to watch convection stir the mud into lazy curlicues. Sometimes she splits the seals on her 'skin, basks face and arms in the thirty-degree seep.</p>
			<p>Sometimes she just comes here to sleep.</p>
			<p>She lies with the shifting mud at her back, staring up into blackness. This is how you fall asleep when you can't close your eyes; you stare into the dark, and when you start seeing things you know you're dreaming.</p>
			<p>Now she sees herself, the high priestess of a new troglodyte society. She was the first one here, deep at peace while the others were still being cut open and reshaped by grubby Dryback hands. She's the founding mother, the template against which other, rawer recruits trace themselves. They come down and they see that her eyes are always capped, and they go and do likewise.</p>
			<p>But she knows it isn't true. The rift is the real creative force here, a blunt hydraulic press forcing them all into shapes of its own choosing. If the others are anything like her it's because they're all being squeezed in the same mold.</p>
			<p><i>And let's not forget the GA. If Ballard was right, they made sure we weren't too different to start with</i>.</p>
			<p>There are all the superficial differences, of course. A bit of racial diversity. Token beaters, token victims, males and females equally represented...</p>
			<p>Clarke has to smile at that. Count on Management to jam a bunch of sexual dysfunctionals together and then make sure the gender ratio is balanced. <i>Nice of them to try and see that nobody gets left out. </i></p>
			<p><i>Except for Ballard, of course. </i></p>
			<p>But at least they learn from their mistakes. Dozing at three thousand meters, Lenie Clarke wonders what their next one will be.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Sudden, stabbing pain in the eyes. She tries to scream; smart implants feel tongue and lips in motion, mistranslate:</p>
			<p>"<i>Nnnnaaaaah...</i>"</p>
			<p>She knows the feeling. She's had it once or twice before. She dives blindly on a random heading. The pain in her head leaps from intense to unbearable.</p>
			<p>"<i>Aaaaaa—</i>"</p>
			<p>She twists back in the opposite direction. A bit better. She trips her headlamp, kicking as hard as she can. The world turns from black to solid brown. Zero viz. Mud seething on all sides. Somewhere close by she hears rocks splitting open.</p>
			<p>Her headlamp catches the outcropping looming up a split second before she hits it. The shock rocks her skull, runs down her spine like a small earthquake. There's a different flavor of pain up there now, mingling with the searing in her eyes. She gropes blindly around the obstacle, keeps going. Her body feels— <i>warm—</i></p>
			<p>It takes a lot of heat to get through a diveskin, especially a class four. Those things are <i>built</i> for thermal stress.</p>
			<p>Eyecaps, on the other hand...</p>
			<p>Black. The world is black again, and clear. Clarke's headlamp stabs out across open space, lays a jiggling footprint on the mud a good ten meters away.</p>
			<p>The view's still rippling, though.</p>
			<p>The pain seems to be fading. She can't be sure. So many nerves have been screaming for so long that even the echoes are torture. She clutches her head, still kicking; the movement twists her around to face the way she came.</p>
			<p>Her secret hideaway has exploded into a wall of mud and sulfur compounds, boiling up from the seabed. Clarke checks her thermister; 45°C, and she's a good ten meters away. Boiled fish skeletons spin in the thermals. Geysers hiss further in, unseen.</p>
			<p>The seep must have burst through the crust in an instant; any flesh caught in that eruption would have boiled off the bone before anything as elaborate as a flight reflex could cut in. A shudder shakes Clarke's body. Another one.</p>
			<p><i>Just luck. Just stupid luck I was far enough away. I could be dead now. I could be dead I could be dead I could be dead—</i></p>
			<p>Nerves fire in her thorax; she doubles over. But you can't sob without breathing. You can't cry with your eyes pinned open. The routines are all there, stuttering into action after years of dormancy, but the pieces they work on have all been changed. The whole body wakes up in a straitjacket.</p>
			<p>—<i>dead dead dead—</i></p>
			<p>That small, remote part of her kicks in, the part she saves for these occasions. It wonders, off in the distance, at the intensity of her reaction. This was hardly the first time that Lenie Clarke thought she was going to die.</p>
			<p>But this was the first time in years that it seemed to matter.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
