<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Night Shift</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-5" id="chapter-2-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Night Shift</h4>
			<p>She was a screamer. He’d programmed her that way. Not to say she didn’t like it, of course; he’d programmed that too. Joel had one hand wrapped around a fistful of her zebra cut⁠—the program had a nifty little customizing feature, and tonight he was honoring SS Preteela⁠—and the other hand was down between her thighs doing preliminary recon. He was actually halfway through his final run when his fucking <i>watch</i>started ringing, and his first reaction was to just keep on plugging, and to kick himself later for not shutting the bloody thing off.</p>
			<p>His second reaction was to remember that he <i>had</i> shut it off. Only emergency priorities could set it ringing.</p>
			<p>“<i>Shit</i>.”</p>
			<p>He clapped his hands, twice; fake Preteela froze in mid-scream. “Answer.”</p>
			<p>A brief squirt of noise as machines exchanged recognition codes. “Grid Authority here. We urgently need of a ‘scaphe pilot for the Channer run tonight, liftoff twenty-three hundred from the Astoria platform. Are you available?”</p>
			<p>“Twenty-three? Middle of the night?”</p>
			<p>A barely audible hiss on the line. Nothing else.</p>
			<p>“Hello?” Joel said.</p>
			<p>“Are you available?” the voice asked again.</p>
			<p>“Who is this?”</p>
			<p>“This is the scheduling subroutine, DI43, Hongcouver office.”</p>
			<p>Joel eyed the petrified tableau waiting in his ‘phones. “That’s pretty late. What’s the payscale?”</p>
			<p>“Eight point five times base,” Hongcouver said. “At your rate salary that would⁠—”</p>
			<p>Joel gulped. “I’m available.”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>“Wait! What’s the run?”</p>
			<p>“Astoria to Channer Vent return.” Subroutines were pretty literal-minded.</p>
			<p>“I mean, what’s the cargo?”</p>
			<p>“Passengers,” said the voice. “Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>Joel stood there a moment, feeling his erection deflate. “Time.” A luminous readout appeared in the air above Preteela’s right shoulder: thirteen ten. He’d have to be on site a half-hour before liftoff, and Astoria was only a couple of hours away⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Lots of time,” he said to no one in particular.</p>
			<p>But he wasn’t really in the mood any more. Work had a way of doing that to him lately. Not the drudgery, or the long hours, or any of the things most people would complain about. Joel <i>liked</i> boredom. You didn’t have to think much.</p>
			<p>But work had gotten really weird lately.</p>
			<p>He pulled the eyephones off his head and looked down at himself. Feedback gloves on his hands, his feet, hanging off his flaccid dick. Take away the headset and it really was a rinky-dink system. At least until he could afford the full suit.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Still, beats real life. No bullshit, no bugs, no worries.</i>
			</p>
			<p>On impulse, he rang up a friend in SeaTac⁠—“Jess, catch this code for me, will you?”⁠—and squirted the recognition sequence Hongcouver had just sent.</p>
			<p>“Got it,” Jess said.</p>
			<p>“It’s valid, right?”</p>
			<p>“Checks out. Why?”</p>
			<p>“Just got called up for a midocean run that’s going to peak around three in the morning. Octuple pay. I just wondered if it was some kind of cruel hoax.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if it is, the Router’s developed a sense of humor. Hey, maybe they’ve put in a head cheese up there.”</p>
			<p>“Yeah.” Ray Stericker’s face flashed through his mind.</p>
			<p>“So what’s the job?” Jess asked.</p>
			<p>“Don’t know. Ferrying something, I guess, but why I have to do it in the middle of the night is beyond me.”</p>
			<p>“Strange days.”</p>
			<p>“Yeah. Thanks, Jess.”</p>
			<p>“Any time.”</p>
			<p><i>Strange days indeed.</i> H-bombs going off all over the abyssal plain, all this traffic going to places nobody ever went to before, no traffic at all in places that used to be just humming. Flash fires and barbecued refugees and slagged shipyards. Chipheads with rotenone cocktails and giant fish. A couple of weeks back Joel had shown up for a run to Mendocino and found some guy sandblasting a radiation hazard logo off the cargo casing.</p>
			<p>
				<i>The whole bloody coast is getting too dangerous. N’AmPac’s gonna burn down way before it ever floods.</i>
			</p>
			<p>But that was the beauty of being a freelancer. He could pick up and move. He <i>would</i> pick up and move, leave the bloody coast behind⁠—shit, maybe even leave <i>N’Am</i> behind. There was always South Am. Or Antarctica, for that matter. He would definitely look into it.</p>
			<p>Right after this run.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
