<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Floodlight</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-5" id="chapter-2-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Floodlight</h4>
			<p>It's almost silent again.</p>
			<p>Little by little, the voices have stopped screaming. Now they converse among themselves in whispers, discussing things that mean nothing to him. It's okay, though. He's used to being ignored. He's <i>glad</i> to be ignored.</p>
			<p>You're safe, Gerry. They can't hurt you.</p>
			<p><i>What— who—</i></p>
			<p>They've all gone. It's just us now.</p>
			<p><i>You—</i></p>
			<p>It's me, Gerry. Shadow. I was wondering when you'd come back.</p>
			<p>He shakes his head. The faintest light still leaks over his shoulder. He turns, not so much toward light as toward a subtle lessening of darkness.</p>
			<p>She was trying to help you, Gerry. She was only trying to help.</p>
			<p><i>She—</i></p>
			<p>Lenie. You're her guardian angel. Remember?</p>
			<p><i>I'm not sure. I think—</i></p>
			<p>But you left her back there. You ran away.</p>
			<p><i>She wanted— I— not </i>inside...</p>
			<p>He feels his legs moving. Water pushes against his face. He moves forward. A soft hole open in the darkness ahead. He can see shapes inside it.</p>
			<p>That's where she lives, Shadow says. Remember?</p>
			<p>He creeps back into the light. There were noises before, loud and painful. There was something big and dark, that moved. Now there is only this great ball hanging overhead, like, like,</p>
			<p>—<i>like a fist</i>—</p>
			<p>He stops, frightened. But everything's quiet, so quiet he can hear faint cries drifting across the seabed. He remembers: there's a hole in the ocean, a little ways from here, that talks to him sometimes. He's never understood what it says.</p>
			<p>Go <i>on</i>, Shadow urges. She went inside.</p>
			<p><i>She's gone—</i></p>
			<p>You can't tell from out here. You have to get in close.</p>
			<p>The underside of the sphere is a cool shadowy refuge; the equatorial lights can't reach all the way around its convex surface. In the overlapping shadows on the south pole, something shimmers enticingly.</p>
			<p>Go <i>on</i>.</p>
			<p>He pushes off the bottom, glides into the cone of shadow beneath the object. A bright shiny disk a meter across, facing down, wriggles inside a circular rim. He looks up into it.</p>
			<p>Something looks back.</p>
			<p>Startled, he twists down and away. The disk writhes in the sudden turbulence. He stops, turns back.</p>
			<p>A bubble. That's all it is. A pocket of gas, trapped underneath the</p>
			<p>—<i>the airlock.</i></p>
			<p>That's nothing to be scared of, Shadow tells him. That's how you get in.</p>
			<p>Still nervous, he swims back underneath the sphere. The air pocket shines silver in the reflected light. A black wraith moves into view within it, almost featureless except for two empty white spaces where eyes should be. It reaches out to meet his outstretched hand. Two sets of fingertips touch, fuse, disappear. One arm is grafted onto its own reflection at the wrist. Fingers, on the other side of the looking glass, touch metal.</p>
			<p>He pulls back his hand, fascinated. The wraith floats overhead, empty and untroubled.</p>
			<p>He draws one hand to his face, runs an index finger from one ear to the tip of the jaw. A very long molecule, folded against itself, unzips.</p>
			<p>The wraith's smooth black face splits open a few centimeters; what's underneath shows pale gray in the filtered light. He feels the familiar dimpling of his cheek in sudden cold.</p>
			<p>He continues the motion, slashing his face from ear to ear. A great smiling gash opens below the wraith's eyespots. Unzipped, a flap of black membrane floats under its chin, anchored at the throat.</p>
			<p>There's a pucker in the center of the skinned area. He moves his jaw; the pucker opens.</p>
			<p>By now most of his teeth are gone. He's swallowed some, spat others out if they came loose when his face was unsealed. No matter. Most of the things he eats these days are even softer than he is. When the occasional mollusk or echinoderm proves too tough or too large to swallow whole, there are always hands. Thumbs still oppose.</p>
			<p>But this is the first time he's actually seen that gaping, toothless ruin where a mouth used to be. He knows this isn't right, somehow.</p>
			<p><i>What happened to me? What am I?</i></p>
			<p>You're Gerry, Shadow says. You're my best friend. You killed me. Remember?</p>
			<p><i>She's gone</i>, Gerry realizes.</p>
			<p>It's okay.</p>
			<p><i>I know it is. I know.</i></p>
			<p>You helped her, Gerry. She's safe now. You saved her.</p>
			<p><i>I know</i>. And he remembers something, small and vital, it that last instant before everything turns white as the sun:</p>
			<p>—<i>This is what you do when you really—</i></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
