<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Shadow</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-2" id="chapter-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Shadow</h4>
			<p>It's a nightmare.</p>
			<p>There's light everywhere, blinding, painful. He can barely move. Everything has such hard edges, and everywhere he looks the boundaries are too sharp. Sounds are like that too, clanks and shouts, every noise an exclamation of pain. He barely knows where he is. He doesn't know why he's there.</p>
			<p>He's drowning.</p>
			<p>"<i>UNNNNNSEEEEELLLLLHHHHHIZZZZZMMMMOOUUUUUTH..."</i></p>
			<p>The tubes in his chest suck at emptiness. The rest of his insides strain to inflate, but there's nothing there to fill them. He thrashes, panicky. Something gives with a snap. Sudden pain resonates in some faraway limb, floods the rest of his body a moment later. He tries to scream, but there's nothing inside to push out.</p>
			<p><i>"HHIZZMMMOUTHFORRRKKRRIISSAAAAAKHEEEZSSUFFUKKATE—"</i></p>
			<p>Someone pulls part of his face off. His insides fill with a rush; not the cold saline he's used to, but it helps. The burning in his chest eases.</p>
			<p><i>"BIGGFFUKKINNGGMMISSTTAAKE—"</i></p>
			<p>Pressure, painful and uneven. Things are holding him down, holding him up, banging into him. The noise is tinny, deafening. He remembers a sound—</p>
			<p>—<i>gravity—</i></p>
			<p>—that applies somehow, but he doesn't know what it means. And then everything's spinning, and everything's familiar and horrible except for one thing, one glimpse of a face that calms him somehow—</p>
			<p><i>Shadow?</i></p>
			<p>—and the weight's gone, the pressure's gone, icewater calms his insides as he spirals back with her, outside again, where she used to be years ago—</p>
			<p>She's showing him how to do it. She creeps into his room after the shouting stops, she crawls under the covers with him and she starts stroking his penis.</p>
			<p>"Dad says this is what you do when you really love somebody," she whispers. And that scares him because they don't even <i>like</i> each other, he just wants her to go away and leave them all alone.</p>
			<p>"Go away. I <i>hate</i> you," he says, but he’s too afraid to move.</p>
			<p>"That's okay, then you don't have to do it for me." She’s trying to laugh, trying to pretend he was just kidding.</p>
			<p>And then, still stroking: "Why are you always so mean to me?”</p>
			<p>"I'm not mean."</p>
			<p>"Are too."</p>
			<p>"You're not supposed to be here."</p>
			<p>"Can't we just be friends?" She rubs up against him. "I can do this whenever you want—"</p>
			<p>"Go away. You can’t stay here."</p>
			<p>"I <i>can</i>, maybe. If it works out, they said. But we have to like each other or they could send me back—”</p>
			<p>"Good."</p>
			<p>She's crying now, she's rubbing against him so hard the bed shakes, "<i>Please can't you like me please I'll do anything I'll even—</i>"</p>
			<p>But he never finds out what she'll even do because that's when the door slams open and whatever happens after that, Gerry Fischer can't remember.</p>
			<p><i>Shadow, I'm so sorry...</i></p>
			<p>But she's back with him now, in the cold and the dark where it's safe. Somehow. Beebe's a dim gray glow in the distance. She floats against that backdrop like a black cardboard cutout.</p>
			<p>"Shadow..." Not his voice.</p>
			<p>"No." Not hers. "Lenie."</p>
			<p>"Lenie..."</p>
			<p>Twin crescents, thin as fingernails, reflect from her eyes. Even in two dimensions she's beautiful.</p>
			<p>Mangled words buzz from her throat: "You know who I am? You can understand me?"</p>
			<p>He nods, then wonders if she can see it. "Yeah."</p>
			<p>"You don't— lately you're sort of gone, Fischer. Like you've forgotten how to be human."</p>
			<p>He tries to laugh, but the vocoder can't handle it. "It comes and goes, I think. I'm...lucid now, anyway. That's the word, isn't it?"</p>
			<p>"You shouldn't have come back inside." Machinery strips any feeling from her words. "He says he'll kill you. Maybe you should just stay out of his way."</p>
			<p>"Okay," he says, and thinks it actually might be.</p>
			<p>"I can bring food out, I guess. They don't care about that."</p>
			<p>"That's okay. I can — go fishing."</p>
			<p>"I'll call for a 'scaphe. It can pick you up out here."</p>
			<p>"No. I can swim back up myself if I want to. Not far."</p>
			<p>"Then I'll tell them to send someone."</p>
			<p>"No."</p>
			<p>A pause. "You can't swim all the way back to the mainland."</p>
			<p>"I'll stay down here...a while..."</p>
			<p>A tremor growls softly along the seabed.</p>
			<p>"You sure?" Lenie says.</p>
			<p>"Yeah." His arm hurts. He doesn't know why.</p>
			<p>She turns slightly. The dim reflections vanish from her eyes for a long moment.</p>
			<p>"I'm sorry, Gerry."</p>
			<p>"Okay."</p>
			<p>Lenie's silhouette twists around and faces back towards Beebe. "I should get going."</p>
			<p>She doesn't leave. She doesn't say anything for almost a minute.</p>
			<p>Then: "Who's Shadow?"</p>
			<p>More silence.</p>
			<p>"She's a...friend. When I was young."</p>
			<p>"She means a lot to you." Not a question. "Do you want me to send her a message?"</p>
			<p>"She's dead," Fischer says, marveling that he's really known it all along.</p>
			<p>"Oh."</p>
			<p>"Didn't mean to," he says. "But she had her own mom and dad, you know, why did she need <i>mine</i>? She went back where she belonged. That's all."</p>
			<p>"Where she belonged," Lenie buzzes, almost too softly to hear.</p>
			<p>"Not my fault," he says. It's hard to talk. It didn't used to be this hard.</p>
			<p>Someone's touching him. Lenie. Her hand is on his arm, and he knows it's impossible but he can feel the warmth of her body through his 'skin.</p>
			<p>"Gerry."</p>
			<p>"Yes?"</p>
			<p>"Why wasn't she with her own family?"</p>
			<p>"She <i>said</i> they hurt her. She always said that. That's how she got in. She <i>used</i> it, it always worked..."</p>
			<p>Not <i>always</i>, Shadow reminds him.</p>
			<p>"And then she went back," Lenie murmurs.</p>
			<p>"I didn't mean to."</p>
			<p>A sound comes out of Lenie's vocoder, and he has no idea what it is. "Brander's right, isn't he. About you and kids."</p>
			<p>Somehow, he knows she's not accusing him. She's just checking.</p>
			<p>"That's what you— do," he tells her. "When you really love someone."</p>
			<p>"Oh, Gerry. You're so completely fucked up."</p>
			<p>A string of clicks taps faintly on the machinery in his chest.</p>
			<p>"They're looking for me," she says.</p>
			<p>"Okay."</p>
			<p>"Be careful, okay?"</p>
			<p>"You could stay. Here."</p>
			<p>Her silence answers him.</p>
			<p>"Maybe I'll come out and visit sometimes," she buzzes at last. She rises up into the water, turns away.</p>
			<p>"Bye," Shadow says. It's the first time she's spoken aloud since she came inside, but Fischer doesn't think Lenie notices the difference.</p>
			<p>And then she's gone, for now.</p>
			<p>But she comes out here all the time. Alone, sometimes. He knows it isn't over. And when she goes back and forth with the others, doing all the things <i>he</i> used to do, he'll be there, off where no one can see. Checking up. Making sure she's okay.</p>
			<p><i>Like her own guardian angel. Right, Shadow?</i></p>
			<p>A couple of fish flicker dimly in the distance.</p>
			<p><i>Shadow...?</i></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
