<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Feral</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-2" id="chapter-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Feral</h4>
			<p>“Hey,” Caraco buzzes as they come around the corner. “Number four.”</p>
			<p>Clarke looks. Four’s fifteen meters away and the water’s a bit murky this shift. Still, she can see something big and dark sticking to the intake vent. Its shadow twitches down along the casing like an absurdly stretched black spider.</p>
			<p>Clarke fins forward a few meters, Caraco at her side. The two women exchange looks.</p>
			<p>Fischer, hanging upside down against the mesh. It’s been four days since anyone’s seen him.</p>
			<p>Clarke gently sets down her carry bag; Caraco follows her lead. Two or three kicks bring them to within five meters of the intake. Machinery hums omnipresently, makes a sound deep enough to feel.</p>
			<p>He’s facing away from them, drifting from side to side, tugged by the gentle suction of the intake vent. The vent’s grillwork is fuzzy with rooted growing things; small clams, tube worms, shadow crabs. Fischer pulls squirming clumps from the intake, leaves them to drift or to fall to the street below. He’s cleaned maybe two meters square so far.</p>
			<p>It’s nice to see he still takes some duties seriously.</p>
			<p>“Hey. Fischer,” Caraco says.</p>
			<p>He spins around as if shot. His forearm flails toward Clarke’s face; she raises her own just in time. In the next instant he’s bowled past her. She kicks, steadies herself. Fischer’s heading for the darkness without looking back.</p>
			<p>“Fischer,” Clarke calls out. “Stop. It’s okay.”</p>
			<p>He stops kicking for a moment, looks back over his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“It’s me,” she buzzes. “And Judy. We won’t hurt you.”</p>
			<p>Barely visible now, he rotates to a stop and turns to face them. Clarke risks a wave.</p>
			<p>“Come on, Fischer. Give us a hand.”</p>
			<p>Caraco comes up behind her. “Lenie, what are you doing?” She’s turned her vocoder down to a hiss. “He’s too far gone, he’s⁠—”</p>
			<p>Clarke cranks her own vocoder down. “Shut up, Judy.” Up again. “What do you say, Fischer? Earn your pay.”</p>
			<p>He’s coming back into the light, hesitantly, like a wild animal lured by the promise of food. Closer, Clarke can see the line of his jaw moving up and down under his hood. The motions are jerky, erratic, as though he’s learning them for the first time.</p>
			<p>Finally a noise comes out. “Oh⁠—kay⁠—”</p>
			<p>Caraco goes back and retrieves their gear. Clarke offers a scraper to Fischer. After a moment, he takes it, clumsily, and follows them to number four.</p>
			<p>“Jussst like,” Fischer buzzes. “Old. T⁠—times.”</p>
			<p>Caraco looks at Clarke. Clarke says nothing.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Near the end of the shift she looks around. “Fischer?”</p>
			<p>Caraco pokes her head out from an access tunnel. “He’s gone?”</p>
			<p>“When did you see him last?”</p>
			<p>Caraco’s vocoder ticks a couple of times; the machinery always misinterprets <i>hmmm.</i> “Half hour ago, maybe.”</p>
			<p>Clarke puts her own vocoder on high. “Hey Fischer! You still around?”</p>
			<p>No answer.</p>
			<p>“Fischer, we’re heading back in a bit. If you want to come along⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Caraco just shakes her head.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
