<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Carousel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Carousel</h4>
			<p>She's been staring at the screen for two minutes and she still can't see what Nakata's going on about. Ridges and fissures run along the display like long green wrinkles. The Throat returns its usual echoes, crammed especially close to center screen because Nakata's got the range topped out. Occasionally a small blip appears between two of the larger ones: Lubin, lazing through an uneventful shift.</p>
			<p>Other than that, nothing.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke bites her lip. "I don't see any—"</p>
			<p>"Just wait. I know I saw it."</p>
			<p>Brander looks in from the lounge. "Saw what?"</p>
			<p>"Alice says she's got something bearing three twenty."</p>
			<p><i>Maybe it's Gerry, </i>Clarke muses. But Nakata wouldn't raise the alarm over <i>that</i>.</p>
			<p>"It was just— <i>there</i>!" Nakata jabs her finger at the display, vindicated.</p>
			<p>Something hovers at the very edge of Beebe's vision. Distance and diffraction make it hazy, but to bounce any kind of signal at that range it's got to have a lot of metal. As Clarke watches, the contact fades.</p>
			<p>"Not one of us," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>"It's big." Brander squints at the panel; his eyecaps reflect through white slits.</p>
			<p>"Muckraker?" Clarke suggests. "A sub, maybe?"</p>
			<p>Brander grunts.</p>
			<p>"There it is again," Nakata says.</p>
			<p>"There <i>they </i>are," Brander amends. Two echoes tease the edge of the screen now, almost indiscernible. Two large, unidentified objects, now rising just barely clear of the bottom clutter, now sinking back down into mere noise.</p>
			<p>Gone.</p>
			<p>"Hey," Clarke says, pointing. There's a tremor rippling along the seismo display, setting off sensors in a wave from the northwest. Nakata taps commands, gets a retrodict bearing on the epicenter. Three-twenty.</p>
			<p>"There is nothing scheduled to be out there," she says.</p>
			<p>"Nothing anyone bothered to tell us about, anyway." Clarke rubs the bridge of her nose. "So who's coming?"</p>
			<p>Brander nods. Nakata shakes her head. "I'll wait for Judy."</p>
			<p>"Oh, that's right. She's going all the way today, isn't she? Surface and back?"</p>
			<p>"Yes. She should be back in maybe an hour."</p>
			<p>"Okay." Brander's on his way downstairs. Clarke reaches past Nakata and taps into an outside channel. "Hey Ken. Wake up."</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p><i>I tell myself I know this place</i>, she muses. <i>I call this my home.</i></p>
			<p><i>I don't know anything. </i></p>
			<p>Brander cruises just below her, lit from underneath by a seabed on fire. The world ripples with color, blues and yellows and greens so pure it almost hurts to look at them. A dusting of violet stars coalesces and sweeps across the bottom; a school of shrimp, royally luminous.</p>
			<p>"Has anyone been—" Clarke begins, but she feels wonder and surprise from Brander. It's obvious he hasn't seen this before. And Lubin— "It's news to me," Lubin answers aloud, as dark as ever.</p>
			<p>"It's gorgeous," Brander says. "We've been down here how long, and we never even knew this place existed..."</p>
			<p><i>Except Gerry, maybe.</i> Every now and then Beebe's sonar picks someone up in this direction, when everyone else is accounted for. Not this far out, of course, but who knows how far afield Fischer— or whatever Fischer's become— wanders these days?</p>
			<p>Brander drops away from his squid and coasts down, one arm outstretched. Clarke watches him scoop something off the bottom. A faint tingle clouds her mind for a moment— that indefinable sense of some other mind working nearby— and she's past him, her own squid towing her away.</p>
			<p>"Hey Len," Brander buzzes after her. "Check this out."</p>
			<p>She releases the throttle and arcs back. Brander's got a glassy jointed creature in the palm of his hand. It looks a bit like that shrimp Acton found, back when—</p>
			<p>"Don't hurt it," she says.</p>
			<p>Brander's mask stares back at her. "Why would I hurt it? I just wanted to you to see its eyes."</p>
			<p>There's something about the way Brander's radiating. It's as though he's a little bit out of synch with himself, somehow, as though his brain is broadcasting on two bands at once. Clarke shakes her head. The sensation passes.</p>
			<p>"It doesn't <i>have</i> eyes," she says, looking.</p>
			<p>"Sure it does. Just not on its head."</p>
			<p>He flips it over, uses thumb and forefinger to pin it upside-down against the palm of his other hand. Rows of limbs— legs, maybe, or gills— scramble uselessly for purchase. Between them, where joints meet body, a row of tiny black spheres stare back at Lenie Clarke.</p>
			<p>"Weird," she says. "Eyes on its <i>stomach</i>."</p>
			<p>She's feeling it again: a strange, almost prismatic sense of fractured awareness.</p>
			<p>Brander lets the creature go. "Makes sense. Seeing as how all the light down here comes from below." Suddenly he looks at Clarke, radiating confusion. "Hey Len, you feeling okay?"</p>
			<p>"Yeah, I'm fine."</p>
			<p>"You seem kind of—"</p>
			<p>"<i>Split</i>," they say, simultaneously.</p>
			<p>Realization. She doesn't know how much of it is hers and how much she's tuning in from Brander, but suddenly they both know.</p>
			<p>"There's someone else here," Brander says, unnecessarily.</p>
			<p>Clarke looks around. <i>Lubin.</i> She can't see him.</p>
			<p>"Shit. You think that's it?" Brander's scanning the water too. "You think ol' Ken is finally starting to tune in?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know."</p>
			<p>"Who else could it be?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know. Who else is out here?"</p>
			<p>"Mike. Lenie." Lubin's voice, faintly, from somewhere ahead.</p>
			<p>Clarke looks at Brander. Brander looks back.</p>
			<p>"Right here," Brander calls, edging his volume up.</p>
			<p>"I found it," Lubin says, invisibly distant.</p>
			<p>Clarke launches off the bottom and grabs her squid. Brander's right beside her, sonar pistol out and clicking. "Got him," he says after a moment. "That way."</p>
			<p>"What else?"</p>
			<p>"Don't know. Big, anyhow. Three, four meters. Metallic."</p>
			<p>Clarke tweaks the throttle. Brander follows. A riot of fractured color unspools below them.</p>
			<p>"There."</p>
			<p>Ahead of them, a mesh of green light sections the bottom into squares.</p>
			<p>"What—"</p>
			<p>"Lasers," Brander says. "I think."</p>
			<p>Emerald threads float perfectly straight, a luminous profusion of right angles a few centimeters off the bottom. Beneath them, drab metal pipes run along the rock; tiny prisms erupt at regular intervals along their length, like spines. Each prism, an interstice; from each interstice, four beams of coherent light, and four, and four, a wire-frame checkerboard overlaid against bedrock.</p>
			<p>They cruise two meters over the grid. "I'm not sure," Brander grates, "but I think it's all just one beam. Reflected back across itself."</p>
			<p>"Mike—"</p>
			<p>"I see it," he says.</p>
			<p>At first it's just a fuzzy green column resolving out of the middle distance. Nearness brings clarity; the beams crisscrossing the ocean floor converge in a circle here, bend vertically up to form the luminous bars of a cylindrical cage. Within that cage a thick metal stalk rises out of the seabed. A great disk flowers at its top, spreads out like some industrial parasol. The spokes of laser light stream down from its perimeter and bounce endlessly away along the bottom.</p>
			<p>"It's like a— a carousel," Clarke buzzes, remembering an old picture from an even older time. "Without horses..."</p>
			<p>"Don't block those beams," Lubin buzzes. He's hanging off to one side, aiming a sonar pistol at the structure. "They're too weak to hurt you unless you get it in the eye, but you don't want to interfere with what they're doing."</p>
			<p>"And that is?" Brander says.</p>
			<p>Lubin doesn't answer.</p>
			<p><i>What in the world—</i> But Clarke's confusion is only partly directed at the mechanism before her. The rest dwells on a disorienting sense of alien cognition, very strong now, not her, not Brander, but somehow familiar.</p>
			<p><i>Ken? That you?</i></p>
			<p>"This isn't what we saw on sonar," Brander's saying. Clarke feels his confusion even as he talks over it. "Whatever we saw was moving around."</p>
			<p>"Whatever we saw was probably planting this," Lubin buzzes. "It's long gone by now."</p>
			<p>"But what <i>is...</i>" Brander's voice trails down to a mechanical croak.</p>
			<p>No. It's not Lubin. She knows that now.</p>
			<p>"It's thinking," she says. "It's <i>alive</i>."</p>
			<p>Lubin's got another instrument out now. Clarke can't see the visual readout but its telltale <i>tic tic ticking</i> carries clearly through the water.</p>
			<p>"It's radioactive," he says.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>Alice Nakata's voice comes to them in the endless darkness between Beebe and the Land of the Carousel.</p>
			<p>"—<i>Judy</i>—" it whispers, almost too faint to make out. "—<i>scatter— lay—</i>"</p>
			<p>"Alice?" Clarke's got her vocoder cranked loud enough to hurt her own ears. "We can't hear you. Say again?"</p>
			<p>"—<i>just— no sign—</i>"</p>
			<p>Clarke can barely distinguish the words. Somehow, though, she can hear the fear in them.</p>
			<p>A small tremor shudders past, raising clouds of mud and swamping Nakata's signal. Lubin throttles up his squid and pulls away. Clarke and Brander follow suit. Somewhere in the darkness ahead, Beebe draws closer in decibel fractions.</p>
			<p>The next words they hear manage to cut through the noise: "Judy's gone!"</p>
			<p>"Gone?" Brander echoes. "Gone where?"</p>
			<p>"She just disappeared!" The voice hisses softly from every direction. "I was talking to her. She was up above the deep scattering layer, she was— I was telling her about the signal we saw and she said she saw something too and then she was <i>gone...</i>"</p>
			<p>"Did you check sonar?" Lubin wants to know.</p>
			<p>"Yes! Yes of course I checked the sonar!" Nakata's words are increasingly clear. "As soon as she was cut off I checked but I saw nothing for sure. There was something, maybe, but the scattering layer is very thick today, I could not be sure. And it's been fifteen minutes now and she still hasn't come back..."</p>
			<p>"Sonar wouldn't pick her up anyway," Brander says softly. "Not through the DSL."</p>
			<p>Lubin ignores him. "Listen, Alice. Did she say what she saw?"</p>
			<p>"No. Just something, she said, and then I heard nothing more."</p>
			<p>"Your sonar contact. How big?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know! It was just there for a second, and the layer—"</p>
			<p>"Could it have been a sub? Alice?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know!" the voice cries, disembodied and anguished. "Why would it? Why would anyone?"</p>
			<p>Nobody answers. The squids race on.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
