<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Scream</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-1" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Scream</h4>
			<p>TRAN/OFFI/210850:2132</p>
			<p>This is my second night in Beebe. I’ve asked the participants not to alter their behavior in my presence, since I’m here to observe routine station operations. I’m pleased to report that my request is being honored by everyone involved. This is gratifying insofar as it minimizes “observer effects”, but it may present problems given that the rifters do not keep reliable schedules. This makes it difficult to plan one’s time with them, and in fact there’s one employee⁠—Ken Lubin⁠—whom I haven’t seen since I arrived. Still. I have plenty of time.</p>
			<p>The rifters tend to be withdrawn and uncommunicative⁠—a layperson might call them <i>sullen</i>⁠—but this is entirely in keeping with the profile. The Station itself seems to be well-maintained and is operating smoothly, despite a certain disregard for standard protocols.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can’t hear anything at all.</p>
			<p>Yves Scanlon lies on his bunk, not listening. He does not hear any strange sounds filtering in through the hull. There is no reedy, spectral keening from the seabed, no faint sound of howling wind because he knows that, down here, no wind is possible. Imagination, perhaps. A trick of the brain stem, an auditory hallucination. He’s not the slightest bit superstitious; he’s a scientist. He does not hear the ghost of Karl Acton moaning on the seabed.</p>
			<p>And now, concentrating, he’s quite certain he hears nothing at all.</p>
			<p>It really doesn’t bother him, being stuck in a dead man’s quarters. After all, where else <i>is</i> there? It’s not as though he’s going to move in with one of the vampires. And besides, Acton’s been gone for months now.</p>
			<p>Scanlon remembers the first time he heard the recording. Four lousy words: “We lost Acton. Sorry.” Then she hung up. Cold bitch, Clarke. Scanlon once thought something might happen between her and Acton, it was a jigsaw match from the profiles, but you wouldn’t know it from that phone call.</p>
			<p><i>Maybe it’s her,</i> he muses. <i>Maybe it’s not Lubin after all, maybe it’s Clarke.</i></p>
			<p>“We lost Acton.” So much for eulogy. And Fischer before Acton, and Everitt over at Linke. And Singh before Everitt. And⁠—</p>
			<p>And now Yves Scanlon is here, in their place. Sleeping on their bunk, breathing their air. Counting the seconds, in darkness and quiet. In dark⁠—</p>
			<p><i>Jesus Christ, what</i>is⁠—</p>
			<p>And quiet. Everything’s quiet. Nothing’s moaning out there.</p>
			<p>Nothing at all.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/220850:0945</p>
			<p>We’re all mammals, of course. We therefore have a Circadian rhythm which calibrates itself to ambient photoperiod. It’s been known for some time that when people are denied photoperiodic cues their rhythms tend to lengthen, usually stabilizing between twenty-seven and thirty-six hours. Adherence to a regular twenty-four hour work schedule is usually sufficient to keep this from happening, so we didn’t expect a problem in the deep stations. As an added measure I recommended that a normal photoperiod be built into Beebe’s lighting systems; the lights are programmed to dim slightly between twenty-two hundred and oh seven hundred every day.</p>
			<p>The participants have apparently chosen to ignore these cues. Even during ‘daytime’ they keep ambient lighting dimmer than my suggested ‘nocturnal’ levels. (They also prefer to leave their eyecaps in at all times, for obvious reasons; although I had not predicted this behavior, it is consistent with the profile.) Work schedules are somewhat⁠—flexible, but this is to be expected given that their sleep cycles are always shifting in relation to each other. Rifters do not wake up in time to perform their duties; they perform their duties whenever two or more of them happen to be awake. I suspect that they also work alone sometimes, a safety violation, but I have yet to confirm this.</p>
			<p>For the moment, these unorthodox behaviors do not appear to be serious. Necessary work seems to get done on time, even though the station is currently understaffed. However, I believe the situation is potentially problematic. Efficiency could probably be improved by stricter adherence to a twenty-four hour diel cycle. Should the GA wish to ensure such adherence, I would recommend proteoglycan therapy for the participants. Hypothalamic rewiring is another possibility; it is more invasive, but would be virtually impossible to subvert.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Vampires. That’s a good metaphor. They avoid the light, and they’ve taken out all the mirrors. That could be part of the problem right there. Scanlon had very sound reasons for recommending mirrors in the first place.</p>
			<p>Most of Beebe⁠—all of it, except for his cubby⁠—is too dark for uncapped vision. Maybe the vampires are trying to conserve energy. A high priority, sitting here next to eleven thousand megawatts’ worth of generating equipment. Still, these people are all under forty; they probably can’t imagine a world without rationed power.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Bullshit. There’s logic, and there’s vampire logic. Don’t confuse the two.</i>
			</p>
			<p>For the past two days, leaving his cubby has been like creeping out into some dark alleyway. He’s finally given in and capped his eyes like the rest of them. Now Beebe’s bright enough, but so pale. Hardly any color at all. As though the cones have been sucked right out of his eyes.</p>
			<p>Clarke and Caraco lean against the ready room bulkhead, watching with their white, white eyes as he checks out his diving armor. No vampire vivisection for Yves Scanlon, no sirree. Not for this short a tour. Preshmesh and acrylic all the way.</p>
			<p>He fingers a gauntlet; chain mail, with links the size of pinheads. He smiles. “Looks okay.”</p>
			<p>The vampires just watch and wait.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Come on, Scanlon, you’re the mechanic. They’re machines like everyone else; they just need more of a tune-up. You can handle them.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Very nice tech,” he remarks, setting the armor back down. “Of course, it’s not much next to the hardware <i>you</i> folks are packing. What’s it like to be able to turn into a fish at will?”</p>
			<p>“Wet,” Caraco says, and a moment later looks at Clarke. Checking for approval, maybe.</p>
			<p>Clarke just keeps staring at him. At least, he thinks she’s staring. It’s so damn hard to tell.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Relax. She’s only trying to psyche you out. The usual stupid dominance games.</i>
			</p>
			<p>But he knows it’s more than that. Deep down, the rifters just don’t like him.</p>
			<p>
				<i>I know what they are. That’s why.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Take a dozen children, any children. Beat and mix thoroughly until some lumps remain. Simmer for two to three decades; bring to a slow, rolling boil. Skim off the full-blown psychotics, the schizoaffectives, the multiple personalities, and discard. (There were doubts about Fischer, actually; but then, who <i>doesn’t</i> have an imaginary friend at some point?)</p>
			<p>Let cool. Serve with dopamine garnish.</p>
			<p>What do you get? Something bent, not broken. Something that fits into cracks too twisted for the rest of us.</p>
			<p>Vampires.</p>
			<p>“Well,” Scanlon says into the silence. “Everything checks out. Can’t wait to try it on.” Without waiting for a reply⁠—without exposing himself to the lack of one⁠—he climbs upstairs. At the edge of his vision, Clarke and Caraco exchange looks. Scanlon glances back, rigorously casual, but any smiles have disappeared by the time he scans their faces.</p>
			<p><i>Go ahead, ladies. Indulge yourselves while you can.</i> The lounge is empty. Scanlon passes through it and into the corridor. <i>You’ve got maybe five years before you’re obsolete.</i> His cubby⁠—Acton’s cubby⁠—is third on the left. <i>Five years before all this can run itself without your help.</i> He opens the hatch; brilliant light spills out, blinding him for a moment while his eyecaps compensate. Scanlon steps inside, swings the hatch shut. Sags against it.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Shit. No locks.</i>
			</p>
			<p>After a while he lies back on his bunk, stares up at a congested ceiling.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Maybe we should have waited after all. Not let them rush us. If we’d just taken the time to do it right from the start⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>But they hadn’t had the time. Total automation at startup would have delayed the whole program longer than civilized appetites were willing to wait. And the vampires were already there, after all. They’d be so much use in the short run, and then they’d be sent home, and they’d be glad to leave this place. Who wouldn’t be?</p>
			<p>The possibility of addiction never even came up.</p>
			<p>It seems insane on the face of it. How could anyone get addicted to a place like this? What kind of paranoia has seized the GA, that they’d worry about people refusing to <i>leave</i>? But Yves Scanlon is no mere layperson, he’s not fooled by the merely apparent. He’s beyond anthropomorphism. He’s looked into all those undead eyes, up there in his world, down here in theirs, and he knows: vampires live by different rules.</p>
			<p>Maybe they <i>are</i>too happy here. It’s one of two questions Yves Scanlon has set out to answer. Hopefully they won’t figure that out while he’s still down here. They dislike him enough as it is.</p>
			<p>It’s not their fault, of course. It’s just the way they’re programmed. They can’t help hating him, any more than he can help the reverse.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Preshmesh is better than surgery. That’s about the most he can say for it.</p>
			<p>The pressure jams all those tiny interlocking plates together, and they don’t seem to stop clenching until they’re a micron away from grinding his body to pulp. There’s a stiffness in the joints. It’s perfectly safe, of course. Perfectly. And Scanlon can breathe unpressurised air when he goes outside, and nobody’s had to carve out half his chest in the meantime.</p>
			<p>He’s been out now for about fifteen minutes. Beebe’s just a few meters away. Clarke and Brander escort him on his maiden voyage, keeping their distance. Scanlon kicks, rises clumsily from the bottom; the mesh lets him swim like a man with splinted limbs. Vampires skim the edge of his vision like effortless shadows.</p>
			<p>His helmet seems like the center of the universe. Wherever he looks, an infinite weight of black ocean presses in against the acrylic. A tiny flaw down by the neck seal catches his eye; he stares, horrified, as a hairline crack grows across his field of vision.</p>
			<p>“<i>Help! Get me in!</i>” He kicks furiously towards Beebe.</p>
			<p>Nobody answers.</p>
			<p>“<i>My helmet! My hel⁠—</i>” The crack isn’t just growing now: it’s <i>squirming</i>, twitching laterally across the corner of the helmet bubble like⁠—like⁠—</p>
			<p>Yellow featureless eyes staring in from the ocean. A black hand, silhouetted in Beebe’s halo, reaching for his face⁠—</p>
			<p>“<i>Ahhh⁠—”</i></p>
			<p>A thumb grinds down on the crack in Scanlon’s helmet. The crack smears, <i>bursts</i>; fine gory filaments smudge against the acrylic. The back half of the hairline peels off and writhes loose into the water, coiling, uncoiling⁠—</p>
			<p><i>Dying.</i> Scanlon pants with relief. <i>A worm. Some stupid fucking roundworm on my faceplate and I thought I was going to die, I thought⁠—</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>Oh Christ. I’ve made a complete fool of myself.</i>
			</p>
			<p>He looks around. Brander, hanging off his right shoulder, points to the gory remnants sticking to the helmet. “If it ever really cracked you wouldn’t have time to complain. You’d look just like that.”</p>
			<p>Scanlon clears his throat. “Thanks. Sorry, I⁠—well, you know I’m new here. Thanks.”</p>
			<p>“By the way.”</p>
			<p>Clarke’s voice. Or what’s left of it, after the machinery does its job. Scanlon flails around until she comes into view overhead.</p>
			<p>“How long are you going to be checking up on us?” she asks</p>
			<p>
				<i>Neutral question. Perfectly reasonable.</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>In fact, you’ve got to wonder why nobody asked it before⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>“A week at least.” His heart is slowing down again. “Maybe two. As long as it takes to make sure things are running smoothly.”</p>
			<p>She’s silent for a second. Then: “You’re lying.” It doesn’t sound like an accusation, somehow; just a simple observation. Maybe it’s the vocoder.</p>
			<p>“Why do you say that?”</p>
			<p>She doesn’t answer. Something else does; not quite a moan, not quite a voice. Not quite faint enough to ignore.</p>
			<p>Scanlon feels the abyss trickling down his back. “Did you hear that?”</p>
			<p>Clarke slips down past him to the seabed, rotating to keep him in view. “Hear? What?”</p>
			<p>“It was⁠—” Scanlon listens. A faint tectonic rumble. That’s all. “Nothing.”</p>
			<p>She pushes off the bottom at an angle, slides up through the water to Brander. “We’re on shift,” she buzzes at Scanlon. “You know how the ‘lock works.”</p>
			<p>The vampires vanish into the night.</p>
			<p>Beebe shines invitingly. Alone and suddenly nervous, Scanlon retreats to the airlock.</p>
			<p><i>But I wasn’t lying. I</i>wasn’t. He hasn’t had to, yet. Nobody’s asked the right questions.</p>
			<p>Still. It seems odd that he has to remind himself.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/230850:0830</p>
			<p>I’m about to embark on my first extended dive. Apparently, the participants have been asked to catch a fish for one of the Pharm consortiums. Washington/Rand, I believe. I find this a bit puzzling⁠—usually Pharms are only interested in bacteria, and they use their own people for collecting⁠—but it provides the participants with a change from the usual routine, and it provides me an opportunity to watch them in action. I expect to learn a great deal.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Brander is slouched at the library when Scanlon comes through the lounge. His fingers rest unmoving on the keypad. Eyephones hang unused in their hooks. Brander’s empty eyes point at the flatscreen. The screen is dark.</p>
			<p>Scanlon hesitates. “I’m heading out now. With Clarke and Caraco.”</p>
			<p>Brander’s shoulders rise and fall, almost indiscernibly. A sigh, perhaps. A shrug.</p>
			<p>“The others are at the Throat. You’ll be the only⁠—I mean, will you be running tender from Comm?”</p>
			<p>“You told us not to change the routine,” Brander says, not looking up.</p>
			<p>“That’s true, Michael. But⁠—”</p>
			<p>Brander stands. “So make up your mind.” He disappears down the corridor. Scanlon watches him go. <i>Naturally this has to go into my report. Not that you care.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>You might, though. Soon enough.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Scanlon drops into the wet room and finds it empty. He struggles into his armor single-handed, taking an extra few moments to ensure that the helmet bubble is spotless. He catches up with Clarke and Caraco just outside; Clarke is checking out a quartet of squids hovering over the seabed. One of them is tethered to a specimen canister resting on the bottom, a pressure-proof coffin over two meters long. Caraco sets it for neutral buoyancy; it rises a few centimeters.</p>
			<p>They set off without a word. The squids tow them into the abyss; the women in the lead, Scanlon and the canister following behind. Scanlon looks back over his shoulder. Beebe’s comforting lights wash down from yellow to gray, then disappear entirely. Feeling a sudden need for reassurance, he trips through the channels on his acoustic modem. There: the homing beacon. You’re never really lost down here as long as you can hear that.</p>
			<p>Clarke and Caraco are running dark. Not even their squids are shining.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Don’t say anything. You don’t want them to change their routine, remember?</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>Not that they would anyway.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Occasional dim lights flash briefly at the corner of his eye, but they always vanish when he looks at them. After an endless few minutes a bright smear fades into view directly ahead, resolves into a collection of copper beacons and dark angular skyscrapers. The vampires avoid the light, head around it at an angle. Scanlon and cargo follow helplessly.</p>
			<p>They set up just off the Throat, at the borderline between light and dark. Caraco unlatches the canister as Clarke rises into the column above them; she’s got something in her right hand, but Scanlon can’t see what it is. She holds it up as though displaying it to an invisible crowd.</p>
			<p>It gibbers.</p>
			<p>It sounds like a very loud mosquito at first. Then it dopplers down to a low growl, slides back up into erratic high frequency.</p>
			<p>And now, finally, Lenie Clarke turns her headlight on.</p>
			<p>She hangs up there like some crucified ascendant, her hand whining at the abyss, the light from her head sweeping the water like, like⁠—</p>
			<p>—<i>a dinner bell</i>, Scanlon realizes as something charges out of the darkness at her, almost as big as she is and Jesus the <i>teeth</i> on it⁠—</p>
			<p>It swallows her leg up to the crotch. Lenie Clarke takes it all in stride. She jabs down with a billy that’s magically appeared in her left hand. The creature bloats and bursts in a couple of places; clumps of bubbles erupt like silvery mushrooms through flesh, shudder off into the sky. The creature thrashes, its gullet a monstrous scabbard around Clarke’s leg. The vampire reaches down and dismembers it with her bare hands.</p>
			<p>Caraco, still fiddling with the canister, looks up. “Hey, Len. They wanted it <i>intact</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Wrong kind,” Clarke buzzes. The water around her is full of torn flesh and flashing scavengers. Clarke ignores them, turning slowly, scanning the abyss.</p>
			<p>Caraco: “Behind you; four o’clock.”</p>
			<p>“Got it,” Clarke says, spinning to a new bearing.</p>
			<p>Nothing happens. The shredded carcass, still twitching, drifts toward the bottom, scavengers sparkling on all sides. Clarke’s handheld voicebox gurgles and whines.</p>
			<p><i>How⁠—</i> Scanlon moves his tongue in his mouth, ready to ask aloud.</p>
			<p>“Not now,” Caraco buzzes at him, before he can.</p>
			<p>
				<i>There’s nothing there. What are they keying on?</i>
			</p>
			<p>It comes in fast, unswerving, from the precise direction Lenie Clarke is facing. “That’ll do,” she says.</p>
			<p>A muffled explosion to Scanlon’s left. A thin contrail of bubbles streaks from Caraco to monster, connecting the two in an instant. The thing jerks at a sudden impact. Clarke slips to one side as it thrashes past, Caraco’s dart embedded in its flank.</p>
			<p>Clarke’s headlight goes out, her voicebox falls silent. Caraco stows the dart gun and swims up to join her. The two women maneuver their quarry down towards the canister. It snaps at them, weak and spastic. They push it down into the coffin, seal the top.</p>
			<p>“Like shooting fish for a barrel,” Caraco buzzes.</p>
			<p>“How did you know it was coming?” Scanlon asks.</p>
			<p>“They always come,” Caraco says. “The sound fools them. And the light.”</p>
			<p>“I mean, how did you know which direction? In advance?”</p>
			<p>A moment’s silence.</p>
			<p>“You just get a feel for it after a while,” Clarke says finally.</p>
			<p>“That,” Caraco adds, “and this.” She holds up a sonar pistol, tucks it back under her belt.</p>
			<p>The convoy reforms. There’s a prescribed drop-off point for monsters, a hundred meters away from the Throat. (The GA has never been keen on letting outsiders wander too far into its home turf.) Once again the vampires leave light for darkness, Scanlon in tow. They travel through a world utterly without form, save for the scrolling circle of mud in his headlight. Suddenly Clarke turns to Caraco.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go,” she buzzes, and peels away into the void.</p>
			<p>Scanlon throttles his squid, edges up beside Caraco.</p>
			<p>“Where’s she off to?”</p>
			<p>“Here we are,” Caraco says. They coast to a halt. Caraco fins back to the droned squid and touches a control; buckles disengage, straps retract. The canister floats free. Caraco cranks down the buoyancy and it settles down on a clump of tubeworms.</p>
			<p>“Len⁠—uh, Clarke,” Scanlon prods.</p>
			<p>“They need an extra hand back at the Throat. She went to help out.”</p>
			<p>Scanlon checks his modem channel. Of course it’s the right one, if it wasn’t he wouldn’t be able to hear Caraco. Which means that Clarke and the vampires at the Throat must have been using a different frequency. Another safety violation<i>.</i></p>
			<p>But he’s not a fool, he knows the story. They’ve only switched channels because <i>he’s</i> here. They’re just trying to keep him out of the loop.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Par for the course. First the fucking GA, now the hired help⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>A sound, from behind. A faint electrical whine. The sound of a squid starting up.</p>
			<p>Scanlon turns around. “Caraco?”</p>
			<p>His headlamp sweeps across canister, squid, seabed, water.</p>
			<p>“Caraco? You there?”</p>
			<p>Canister. Squid. Mud.</p>
			<p>“Hello?”</p>
			<p>Empty water.</p>
			<p>“Hey! Caraco! What the <i>hell⁠—</i>”</p>
			<p>A faint thumping, very close by.</p>
			<p>He tries to look everywhere at once. One leg presses against the coffin.</p>
			<p>The coffin is rocking.</p>
			<p>He lays his helmet against its surface. Yes. Something inside, muffled, wet. Thumping. Trying to get out.</p>
			<p>
				<i>It can’t. No way. It’s just dying in there, that’s all.</i>
			</p>
			<p>He pushes away, drifts up into the water column. He feels very exposed. A few stiff-legged kicks take him back to the bottom. Slightly better.</p>
			<p>“Caraco? Come <i>on</i>, Judy⁠—”</p>
			<p><i>Oh Jesus. She left me here. She just fucking</i>left <i>me out here.</i></p>
			<p>He hears something moaning, very close by.</p>
			<p>Inside his helmet, in fact.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/230850:2026</p>
			<p>I accompanied Judy Caraco and Lenie Clarke outside today, and witnessed several events that concern me. Both participants swam through unlit areas without headlamps and spent significant periods of time isolated from dive buddies; at one point, Caraco simply left me on the seabed without warning. This is potentially life-threatening behavior, although of course I was able to find my way back to Beebe using the homing beacon.</p>
			<p>I have yet to receive an explanation for all this. The <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>⁠—the other personnel are presently gone from the station. I can find two or three of them on sonar; I suppose the rest are just hidden in the bottom clutter. Once again, this is extremely unsafe behavior.</p>
			<p>Such recklessness appears to be typical here. It implies a relative indifference to personal welfare, an attitude entirely consistent with the profile I developed at the onset of the rifter program. (The only alternative is that they simply do not appreciate the dangers involved in this environment, which is unlikely.)</p>
			<p>It is also consistent with a generalized post-traumatic addiction to hostile environments. This doesn’t constitute evidence <i>per sé</i>, of course, but I have noted one or two other things which, taken together, may be cause for concern. Michael Brander, for example, has a history which ranges from caffeine and sympathomimetic abuse to limbic hot-wiring. He’s known to have brought a substantial supply of phencyclidine derms with him to Beebe; I’ve just located it in his cubby and I was surprised to find that it has barely been touched. Phencyclidine is not, physiologically speaking, addictive⁠—exogenous-drug addicts are screened out of the program⁠—but the fact remains that Brander had a habit when he came down here, a habit which he has since abandoned. I have to wonder what he’s replaced it with.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The wet room.</p>
			<p>“<i>There</i>you are. Where did you go?”</p>
			<p>“Had to recover this cartridge. Bad sulfide head.”</p>
			<p>“You could have told me. I was supposed to come along on your rounds anyway, remember? You just left me out there.”</p>
			<p>“You got back.”</p>
			<p>“<i>That’s</i>⁠—that’s not the point, Judy. You don’t leave someone alone at the bottom of the ocean without a word. What if something had happened to me?”</p>
			<p>“We go out alone all the time. It’s part of the job. Watch that, it’s slippery.”</p>
			<p>“Safety procedures are also part of the job. Even for you. And especially for me, Judy, I’m a complete fish out of water here, heh heh. You can’t expect me to know my way around.”</p>
			<p>“.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Excuse me?”</p>
			<p>“We’re short-handed, remember? We can’t always afford to buddy up. And you’re a big strong man⁠—well, you’re a man, anyway. I didn’t think you needed baby-sit⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<i>Shit! My hand!</i>”</p>
			<p>“I told you to be careful.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Ow.</i> How much does the fucking thing weigh?”</p>
			<p>“About ten kilos, without all the mud. I guess I should’ve rinsed it off.”</p>
			<p>“I guess so. I think one of the heads gouged me on the way down. Shit, I’m bleeding.”</p>
			<p>“Sorry about that.”</p>
			<p>“Yeah. Well, look, Caraco. I’m sorry if babysitting rubs you the wrong way, but a little more babysitting and Acton and Fischer might still be alive, you know? A little more babysitting and⁠—did you hear that?”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“From outside. That⁠—moaning, sort of⁠—”</p>
			<p>…</p>
			<p>“Come on, C⁠—Judy. You must’ve heard it!”</p>
			<p>“Maybe the hull shifted.”</p>
			<p>“No. I <i>heard</i> something. And this isn’t the first time, either.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t hear anything.”</p>
			<p>“You d⁠—where are you going? You just came <i>in</i>! Judy⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Clank. Hiss.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“… don’t go⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/250850:2120</p>
			<p>I’ve asked each of the participants to submit to a routine sweep under the medical scanner⁠—or rather, I’ve asked most of them directly, and asked them to pass the word on to Ken Lubin, whom I’ve seen a few times now but haven’t actually spoken to yet. (I have twice attempted to engage <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lubin in conversation, without success.) The participants know, of course, that medical scans do not require physical contact on my part, and they’re well able to run them at their own convenience without me even being present. Still, although no one has explicitly refused my request, there has been a notable lack of enthusiasm in terms of actual compliance. It’s fairly obvious (and entirely consistent with my profile) that they consider it something of an intrusion, and will avoid it if possible. To date I’ve managed to get rundowns on only Alice Nakata and Judy Caraco. I’ve appended their binaries to this entry; both show elevated production of dopamine and norepinephrine, but I can’t establish whether this began before or after their present tour of duty. GABA and other inhibitor levels were slightly up, too, left over from their previous dive (less than an hour before the scan).</p>
			<p>The others, so far, haven’t been able to “find the time” for an exam. In the meantime I’ve resorted to going over stored scanner records of old injuries. Not surprisingly, physical injuries are common down here, although they’ve become much less frequent as of late. There are no cases of head trauma on record, however⁠—at least, nothing that would warrant an NMR. This effectively limits my brain chemistry data to what the participants are willing to provide on request⁠—not much, so far. If this doesn’t change, the bulk of my analysis will have to be based on behavioral observations. As medieval as that sounds.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<i>Who could it be? Who?</i>
			</p>
			<p>When Yves Scanlon first sank into the abyss he had two questions on his mind. He’s chasing the second one now, lying in his cubby, shielded from Beebe by a pair of eyephones and the personal database in his shirt pocket. For now, he’s gone mercifully blind to plumbing and condensation.</p>
			<p>He’s not deaf, though. Unfortunately. Every now and then he hears footsteps, or low voices, or⁠—just maybe⁠—the distant cry of something unimaginable in pain; but then he speaks a little louder into the pickup, drowns unwelcome sounds with barked commands to scroll up, link files, search for keywords. Personnel records dance across the inside of his eyes, and he can almost forget where he is.</p>
			<p>His interest in this particular question has not been sanctioned by his employers. <i>They know about it, though, yes sirree they know. They just don’t think</i>I <i>do.</i></p>
			<p>Rowan and her cronies are such assholes. They’ve been lying to him from the start. Scanlon doesn’t know why. He’d have been okay with it, if they’d just leveled with him. But they kept it under wraps. As though he wouldn’t be able to figure it out for himself.</p>
			<p>It’s bloody obvious. There’s more than one way to make a vampire. Usually you take someone who’s fucked in the head, and you train them. But why couldn’t you take someone who’s already trained, and then fuck them in the head? It might even be cheaper.</p>
			<p>You can learn a lot from a witch hunt. All that repressed-memory hysteria back in the nineties, for example: so many people suddenly remembering abuse, or alien abduction, or dear old grandma stirring a cauldron of stewed babies. It didn’t take much, no one had to go in and physically rewire the synapses; the brain’s gullible enough to rewire <i>itself</i> if you coax it. Most of those poor bozos didn’t even know they were doing it. These days it only takes a few weeks worth of hypnotherapy. The right suggestions, delivered just the right way, can inspire memories to build themselves out of bits and pieces. Sort of a neurological cascade effect. And once you <i>think</i> you’ve been abused, well, why wouldn’t your psyche shift to match?</p>
			<p>It’s a good idea. Someone else thought so too, at least that’s what Scanlon heard from Mezzich a couple of weeks ago. Nothing official, of course, but there may already be a few prototypes in the system. Someone right here in Beebe, maybe, a walking testament to Induced False Memory Syndrome. Maybe Lubin. Maybe Clarke. Could be anyone, really.</p>
			<p>
				<i>They should have told me.</i>
			</p>
			<p>They told him, all right. They told him, when he first started, that he was coming in on the ground floor. <i>You’ll have input on pretty much everything</i>, was what Rowan had promised. <i>The design work, the follow-ups</i>. They even offered him automatic coauthorship on all unclassified publications. Yves Scanlon was supposed to be a fucking <i>equal</i>. And then they shut him off in a little room, mumbling to recruits while <i>they</i> made all the decisions up on the thirty-fifth fucking floor.</p>
			<p>Standard corporate mentality. Knowledge was power. Corpses never told anybody <i>anything.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>I was an idiot to believe them as long as I did. Sending up my recommendations, waiting for them to honor a promise or two. And this is the bone they throw me. Stick me at the bottom of the fucking ocean with these post-traumatic head cases because no one else wants to get shit on their hands.</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>I mean, fuck. I’m so far out of the loop I have to coax rumors from a has-been hack like Mezzich?</i>
			</p>
			<p>Still. He wonders who it might be. Brander or Nakata, maybe. Her record shows a background in geothermal engineering and high-pressure tech, and he’s got a Masters in systems ecology with a minor in genomics. Too much education for your average vampire. Assuming there <i>is</i> such a thing.</p>
			<p><i>Wait a second. Why should I trust these files?</i> After all, if Rowan’s keeping this thing under wraps she might not be stupid enough to leave clues lying around in the GA personnel records.</p>
			<p>Scanlon ponders the question. Suppose the files have been modified. Maybe he should check out the <i>least</i> likely candidates. He orders an ascending sort by educational background.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke. Premed dropout, basic virtual-tech <abbr>ed.</abbr> The GA hired her away from the Hongcouver Aquarium. PR department.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Hmm. Someone with Lenie Clarke’s social skills, in public relations? Not likely. I wonder if⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>Jesus. There it is again.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Yves Scanlon strips the phones from his eyes and stares at the ceiling. The sound seeps in through the hull, barely audible.</p>
			<p>
				<i>I’m almost getting used to it, actually.</i>
			</p>
			<p>It sighs through the bulkhead, recedes, dies. Scanlon waits. He realizes he’s holding his breath.</p>
			<p>There. Something very far away. Something very⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<i>Lonely. It sounds so lonely.</i>
			</p>
			<p>He knows how it feels.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The lounge is empty, but something casts a faint shadow through the Communications hatchway. A soft voice from inside: Clarke, it sounds like. Scanlon evesdrops for a few seconds. She’s reciting supply consumption rates, listing the latest bits of equipment to break down. A routine call up to the GA, from the sound of it. She hangs up just before he steps into view.</p>
			<p>She’s sitting slumped in her chair, a cup of coffee within easy reach.</p>
			<p>They eye each other for a moment, without speaking.</p>
			<p>“Anyone else around?” Scanlon wonders.</p>
			<p>She shakes her head.</p>
			<p>“I thought I heard something, a few minutes ago.”</p>
			<p>She turns back to face the console. A couple of icons flash on the main display.</p>
			<p>“What are you doing?”</p>
			<p>She makes a vague gesture to the console. “Running tender. Thought you’d like that, for a change.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but I said⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Not to change the routine,” Clarke cuts in. She seems tired. “Do you always expect everyone to do everything you say?”</p>
			<p>“Is that what you think I meant?”</p>
			<p>She snorts softly, still not looking back.</p>
			<p>“Look,” Scanlon says, “Are you sure you didn’t hear something, like⁠—like⁠—” <i>like a ghost, Clarke? A sound like poor dead Acton might make, watching his own remains rotting out there on the rift?</i></p>
			<p>“Don’t worry about it,” she says.</p>
			<p><i>Aha.</i> “So you <i>did</i> hear something.” <i>She knows what it is, too. They all do.</i></p>
			<p>“What I hear,” she says, “is my own concern.”</p>
			<p><i>Take a hint, Scanlon.</i> But there’s nowhere else to go, except back to his cubby. And the prospect of being alone, right now⁠—somehow, even the company of a vampire seems preferable.</p>
			<p>She turns around to face him again. “Something else?”</p>
			<p>“Not really. Just can’t seem to sleep.” Scanlon dons a disarming smile. “Just not used to the pressure, I guess.” <i>That’s right. Put her at ease. Acknowledge her superiority.</i></p>
			<p>She just stares at him</p>
			<p>“I don’t know how you take it, month after month,” he adds.</p>
			<p>“Yes you do. You’re a psychiatrist. You <i>chose</i> us.”</p>
			<p>“Actually, I’m more of a mechanic.”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” she says, expressionless. “It’s your job to keep things broken.”</p>
			<p>Scanlon looks away.</p>
			<p>She stands up and takes a step towards the hatchway, her tending duties apparently forgotten. Scanlon stands aside. She brushes past, somehow avoiding physical contact in the cramped space.</p>
			<p>“Look,” he blurts out, “how about a quick review of the tending procedure? I’m not all that familiar with this equipment.”</p>
			<p>It’s too obvious. He knows she sees through it before the words are even out of his mouth. But it’s also a perfectly reasonable request from someone in his role. Routine evaluation, after all.</p>
			<p>She watches him for a moment, her head cocked a bit to one side. Her face, expressionless as usual, somehow conveys the impression of a slight smile. Finally she sits down again.</p>
			<p>She taps on a menu. “This is the Throat.” A cluster of luminous rectangles nested in a background of contour lines. “Thermal readout.” The image erupts into psychedelic false color, red and yellow hot spots pulsing at irregular intervals along the main fissure. “You don’t usually bother with thermal when you’re tending,” Clarke explains. “When you’re out there you find that stuff out sooner firsthand anyway.” The psychedelia fades back to green and gray.</p>
			<p><i>And what happens if someone gets taken by surprise out there and you don’t have the readings in here to know they’re in trouble?</i> Scanlon doesn’t ask aloud. Just another cut corner.</p>
			<p>Clarke pans, finds a pair of alphanumeric icons. “Alice and Ken.” Another red hotspot slides into view in the upper left corner of the display.</p>
			<p><i>No, wait a minute; she turned thermal</i>off<i>⁠ ⁠…</i></p>
			<p>“Hey,” Scanlon says, “that’s a <i>deadman switch⁠—</i>”</p>
			<p><i>No audio alarm. Why isn’t there an alarm⁠—</i> His eyes dart across the half-familiar console. <i>Where is it, where⁠—shit⁠—</i></p>
			<p>The alarm’s been disabled.</p>
			<p>“<i>Look!</i>” Scanlon points at the display. “Can’t you⁠—”</p>
			<p>Clarke looks up at him, almost lazily. She doesn’t seem to understand.</p>
			<p>He jabs his thumb down. “Somebody just <i>died</i> out there!”</p>
			<p>She looks at the screen, slowly shakes her head. “No⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<i>You stupid bitch, you cut off the alarm!</i>”</p>
			<p>He hits a control icon. The station starts howling. Scanlon jumps back, startled, bumps the bulkhead. Clarke watches him, frowning slightly.</p>
			<p>“<i>What’s wrong with you?</i>” He reaches out and grabs her by the shoulders. “<i>Do something!</i> Call Lubin, call⁠—” The alarm is deafening. He shakes her, hard, pulls her up out of the chair⁠—</p>
			<p>And remembers, too late: <i>you don’t touch Lenie Clarke.</i></p>
			<p>Something happens in her face. It almost <i>crumples</i>, right there in front of him. Lenie Clarke the ice queen is suddenly nowhere to be seen. In her place there’s only a beaten, blind little kid, body shaking, mouth moving in the same pattern over and over, he can’t hear over the alarm but her lips shape the words, <i>I’m sorry I’m sorry</i> <i>I’m sorry⁠—</i></p>
			<p>All in the few scant seconds before she crystallizes.</p>
			<p>She seems to harden against the sound, against Scanlon’s assault. Her face goes completely blank. She rises out of the chair, centimeters taller than she should be. One hand comes up, grabs Yves Scanlon by the throat. Pushes.</p>
			<p>He staggers backwards into the lounge, flailing. The table appears to one side; he reaches out, steadies himself.</p>
			<p>Suddenly, Beebe falls silent again.</p>
			<p>Scanlon takes a deep breath. Another vampire has appeared in his peripheral vision, standing impassively at the mouth of the corridor; he ignores it. Directly ahead, Lenie Clarke is sitting down again in Communications, her back turned. Scanlon steps forward.</p>
			<p>“It’s Karl,” she says before he can speak.</p>
			<p>It takes a moment to register: <i>Acton</i>.</p>
			<p>“But⁠—that was months ago,” Scanlon says. “You <i>lost</i> him.”</p>
			<p>“We lost him.” She breathes, slowly. “He went down a smoker. It erupted.”</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry,” Scanlon says. “I⁠—didn’t know.”</p>
			<p>“Yeah.” Her voice is tight with controlled indifference. “He’s too far down to⁠—we can’t get him back. Too dangerous.” She turns to face him, impossibly calm. “Deadman switch still works, though. It’ll keep screaming until the battery runs down.” She shrugs. “So we keep the alarm off.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t blame you,” Scanlon says softly.</p>
			<p>“Imagine,” Clarke tells him, “how much your approval comforts me.”</p>
			<p>He turns to leave.</p>
			<p>“Wait,” she says. “I can zoom in for you. I can show you exactly where he died, maximum res.”</p>
			<p>“That’s not necessary.”</p>
			<p>She stabs controls. “No problem. Naturally you’re interested. What kind of mechanic wouldn’t want to know the performance specs on his own creation?” She reshapes the display like a sculptor, hones it down and down until there’s nothing left but a tangle of faint green lines and a red pulsing dot.</p>
			<p>“He got wedged into an ancillary crevice,” she says. “Looks like a tight fit even now, when all the flesh has been boiled away. Don’t know how he managed to get down there when he was all in one piece.” There’s no stress in her voice at all. She could be talking about a friend’s vacation.</p>
			<p>Scanlon can feel her eyes on him; he keeps his on the screen.</p>
			<p>“Fischer,” he says. “What happened to him?”</p>
			<p>From the corner of his eye: she starts to tense, turns it into a shrug. “Who knows? Maybe Archie got him.”</p>
			<p>“Archie?”</p>
			<p>“Archie Toothis.” Scanlon doesn’t recognize the name; it’s not in any of his files, as far as he knows. He considers, decides not to push it.</p>
			<p>“Did <i>Fischer’s</i> deadman go off, at least?”</p>
			<p>“He didn’t have one.” She shrugs. “The abyss can kill you any number of ways, Scanlon. It doesn’t always leave traces.”</p>
			<p>“I’m⁠—I’m sorry if I upset you, Lenie.”</p>
			<p>One corner of her mouth barely twitches.</p>
			<p>And he <i>is</i> sorry. Even though it’s not his fault. <i>I didn’t make you what you are</i>, he wants to say. <i>I didn’t smash you into junk, that was someone else. I just came along afterwards and found a use for you. I gave you a purpose, more of a purpose than you ever had back</i>there<i>.</i></p>
			<p>
				<i>Is that really so bad?</i>
			</p>
			<p>He doesn’t dare ask aloud, so he turns to leave. And when Lenie Clarke lays one finger, very briefly, on the screen where Acton’s icon flashes, he pretends not to notice.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>TRANS/OFFI/260850:1352</p>
			<p>I recently had an interesting conversation with Lenie Clarke. Although she didn’t admit so openly⁠—she is very well defended, and quite expert at hiding her feelings from laypeople⁠—I believe that she and Karl Acton were sexually involved. This is a heartening discovery, insofar as my original profiles strongly suggested that such a relationship would develop. (Clarke has a history of relationships with Intermittent Explosives.) This adds a measure of empirical confidence to other, related predictions regarding rifter behavior.</p>
			<p>I have also learned that Karl Acton, rather than simply disappearing, was actually killed by an erupting smoker. I don’t know what he was doing down there⁠—I’ll continue to investigate⁠—but the behavior itself seems foolish at best and quite possibly suicidal. Suicide is not consistent either with Karl Acton’s DSM or ECM profiles, which must have been accurate when first derived. Suicide, therefore, would imply a degree of basic personality change. This is consistent with the trauma-addiction scenario. However, some sort of physical brain injury can not be ruled out. My search of the medical logs didn’t turn up any head injuries, but was limited to living participants. Perhaps Acton was⁠ ⁠… different⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Oh. I found out who Archie Toothis is. Not in the personnel files at all. The library. <i>Architeuthis</i>: giant squid.</p>
			<p>I think she was kidding.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
