<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Dancer</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-3" id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Dancer</h4>
			<p>A week later Fischer's replacement comes down on the 'scaphe. Nobody stands watch in Communications any more; machines don't care if they have an audience. Sudden clanking reverberates through Beebe Station and Clarke stands alone in the lounge, waiting for the ceiling to open up. Compressed nitrox hisses overhead, blowing seawater back to the abyss.</p>
			<p>The hatch drops open. Green incandescence spills into the room. He climbs down the ladder, diveskin sealed, only his face exposed. His eyes, already capped, are featureless glass balls. But they are not as dead as they should be, somehow. Something stares through those blank lenses, and it almost <i>shines</i>. His blind eyes scan the compartment like radar dishes. They lock onto hers: "You're Lenie Clarke?" The voice is too loud, too normal. <i>We talk in whispers here</i>, Clarke realizes.</p>
			<p>They are not alone now. Lubin, Brander, Caraco have appeared at the edges of her vision, drifting into the room like indifferent wraiths. They take up positions around the edge of the lounge, waiting. Fischer's replacement doesn't seem to notice them. "I'm Acton," he tells Clarke. "And I bring gifts from the overworld. Behold!" He extends his clenched fist, opens it palm up. Clarke sees five metal cylinders there, each no more than two centimeters long. Acton turns slowly, theatrically, showing his trinkets to the other Rifters. "One for each of you," he says. "They go into your chest, right next to the seawater intake."</p>
			<p>Overhead, the docking hatch swings shut. From behind it a postcoital tattoo, metal on metal, heralds the shuttle's escape to the surface. They wait there for a few moments: Rifters, newcomer, five new gadgets to dilute their humanity a little further. Finally, Clarke reaches out to touch one. "What do they do?" she says, her voice neutral.</p>
			<p>Acton snaps his fingers shut, stares about the lounge with eyeless intensity. "Why, Ms. Clarke," he replies, "They tell us when we're dead."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In Communications, Acton spills his trinkets onto a control console. Clarke stands behind him, filling the cubby. Caraco and Brander look in through the hatchway.</p>
			<p>Lubin has disappeared.</p>
			<p>"The program's only four months old," Acton says, "and it's lost two people at Piccard, one each at Cousteau and Link, and Fischer makes five. Not the kind of record you want to trumpet to the world, eh?"</p>
			<p>Nobody says anything. Clarke and Brander stand impassive; Caraco shifts on her feet. Acton sweeps his blank shiny eyes over them all. "Christ but you're a lively lot. You sure Fischer's the only one down here who cashed in?"</p>
			<p>"These things are supposed to save our lives?" Clarke asks.</p>
			<p>"Nah. They don't care <i>that</i> much about us. These just help you find the bodies."</p>
			<p>He turns to the console, plays it with practiced fingers. The topographic display flashes to life on the main screen. "Mmmm." Acton traces along the luminous contours with one finger. "So this is Beebe here in the center, and this must be the rift proper—Jesus, there's a lot of geography out here." He points at a cluster of hard green rectangles halfway to the edge of the screen. "These are the generators?"</p>
			<p>Clarke nods.</p>
			<p>Acton picks up one of the little cylinders. "They say they've already sent down the software for these things." Silence. "Well, I guess we'll find out, won't we?" He fingers the object in his hand, presses one end of it.</p>
			<p>Beebe Station screams aloud.</p>
			<p>Clarke jerks back at the sound; her head cracks painfully against an overhead pipe. The station continues to howl, wordless and despairing.</p>
			<p>Acton touches a control; the scream stops as if guillotined.</p>
			<p>Clarke glances at the others, shaken. They appear unmoved. Of course. For the first time she wonders what their eyes would show, naked.</p>
			<p>"Well," Acton says, "we know the audio alarm works. But you get a visual signal too." He points at the screen: dead center, within the phosphor icon that is Beebe, a crimson dot pulses like a heart under glass.</p>
			<p>"It keys on myoelectricity in the chest," he explains. "Goes off automatically if your heart stops."</p>
			<p>Behind her, Clarke feels Brander turning for the hatchway.</p>
			<p>"Maybe my etiquette is out of date—" Acton says.</p>
			<p>His voice is suddenly very quiet. Nobody else seems to notice.</p>
			<p>"—but I've always thought it was—rude—to walk away when someone's talking to you."</p>
			<p>There's no obvious threat in the words. Acton's tone seems pleasant enough. It doesn't matter. In an instant Clarke sees all the signs again; the reasoned words, the deadened voice, the sudden slight tension of a body rising to critical mass. Something familiar is growing behind Acton's eyecaps.</p>
			<p>"Brander," she says quietly, "why don't you hang around and hear the man out?"</p>
			<p>Behind her, the sounds of motion stop.</p>
			<p>Before her, Acton relaxes ever so slightly.</p>
			<p>Within her, something deeper than the Rift stirs in its sleep.</p>
			<p>"They're a snap to install," Acton says. "It takes about five minutes. GA says deadman switches are standard issue from now on."</p>
			<p><i>I know you</i>, she thinks. <i>I don't remember but I'm sure I've seen you before somewhere...</i></p>
			<p>A tiny knot forms in her stomach. Acton smiles at her, as though sending some secret greeting.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Acton is about to be baptized. Clarke is looking forward to it.</p>
			<p>They stand together in the airlock, their diveskins clinging like shadows. The deadman switch, newly installed, itches in Clarke's chest. She remembers the first time she dropped into the ocean this way, remembers the person who held her hand through that drowning ordeal.</p>
			<p>That person is gone now. The deep sea broke her and spat her out. Clarke wonders if it will do the same to Acton.</p>
			<p>She floods the airlock.</p>
			<p>By now the feeling is almost sensual; her insides folding flat, the ocean rushing into her, cold and unstoppable like a lover. At 4°C the Pacific slides through the plumbing in her chest, anesthetizing the parts of her that can still feel. The water rises over her head; her eyecaps show her the submerged walls of the lock with crystal precision.</p>
			<p>It's not like that with Acton. He's trying to fall in on himself; he only falls into Clarke. She senses his panic, watches him convulse, sees his knees buckle in a space far too narrow to permit collapse.</p>
			<p><i>He needs more room</i>, she thinks, smiling to herself, and opens the outer hatch. They drop.</p>
			<p>She glides down and out, arcing away from under Beebe's oppressive bulk. She leaves the floodlit circle behind, skims into the welcoming darkness with her headlight doused. She feels the presence of the seabed a couple of meters beneath her. She's free again.</p>
			<p>After a few moments she remembers Acton. She turns back the way she came. Beebe's floodlamps stain the darkness with dirty light; the station, bloated and angular, pulls against the cables holding it down. Light pours from its lower surface like feeble rocket exhaust. Pinned face-down in that glare, Acton lies unmoving on the bottom.</p>
			<p>Reluctantly, she swims closer. "Acton?"</p>
			<p>He doesn't move.</p>
			<p>"Acton?" She's back in the light now. Her shadow cuts him in half.</p>
			<p>At last he looks up. "It'ssss—"</p>
			<p>He seems surprised by the sound of his own transmuted voice.</p>
			<p>He puts his hand to his throat. "I'm not—breathing—" he buzzes.</p>
			<p>She doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>He looks back down. There's something on the bottom, a few centimeters from his face. Clarke drifts closer; a tiny shrimplike creature trembles on the substrate.</p>
			<p>"What is it?" Acton asks.</p>
			<p>"Something from the surface. It must have come down on the 'scaphe."</p>
			<p>"But it's—dancing—"</p>
			<p>She sees. The jointed legs flex and snap, the carapace arches to some insane inner rhythm. It seems so brittle a life; perhaps the next spasm, or the next, will shatter it.</p>
			<p>"It's a seizure," she says after a while. "It doesn't belong here. The pressure makes the nerves fire too fast, or something."</p>
			<p>"Why doesn't that happen to us?"</p>
			<p><i>Maybe it does</i>. "Our implants. They pump us full of neuroinhibitors whenever we go outside."</p>
			<p>"Oh. Right," Acton buzzes softly. Gently, he reaches out to the creature. Takes it in the palm of his hand.</p>
			<p>Crushes it.</p>
			<p>Clarke hits him from behind. Acton bounces off the seabed, his hand flying open; fragments of shell, of watery flesh swirl in the water. He kicks, rights himself, stares at Clarke without speaking. His eyecaps shine almost yellow in the light.</p>
			<p>"You asshole," Clarke says very quietly.</p>
			<p>"It didn't belong here," Acton buzzes.</p>
			<p>"Neither do we."</p>
			<p>"It was suffering. You said so yourself."</p>
			<p>"I said the nerves fired too fast, Acton. Nerves carry pleasure as well as pain. How do you know it wasn't dancing for fucking <i>joy</i>?"</p>
			<p>She pushes off the bottom and kicks furiously into the abyss. She wants to reach into Acton's body and tear everything out, sacrifice that gory tangle of viscera and machinery to the monsters at the rift. She can't remember ever being so angry. She tells herself she doesn't know why.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Gurgles and clanks from below. Clarke looks down through the lounge hatch in time to see the airlock spill open. Brander backs out, supporting Acton.</p>
			<p>Acton's 'skin is laid open at the thigh.</p>
			<p>He bends over, removing his flippers. Brander's are already off; he turns to Clarke as she climbs down the ladder. "He met his first monster. Gulper eel."</p>
			<p>"I met my fucking monster all right," Acton says in a low voice. And Clarke sees it coming a fraction of a second before—</p>
			<p>—Acton is on Brander, left fist swinging like a bolo on the end of his arm, once twice three times and Brander is on the floor, bleeding. Acton's bringing his foot back when Lenie gets in front of him, her hands raised to protect herself, crying "Stop it stop it's not his fault!" but somehow it's not Acton she's pleading with it's something inside of him coming out, and she'd do anything if it would only please God go back where it came from—</p>
			<p>It stares through Acton's milky eyes and snarls, "The fucker saw it coming at me! He let that thing tear my leg open!"</p>
			<p>Lenie shakes her head. "Maybe not. You know how dark it is out there, I've been down here longer than anyone and they sneak up on me all the time, Acton. Why would Brander want to hurt you?"</p>
			<p>She hears Brander coming to his feet behind her. His voice carries over her shoulder: "Brander sure as shit wants to hurt him <i>n</i>—"</p>
			<p>She cuts him off. "Look, I can handle this." Her words are for Brander; her eyes remain locked with Acton's. "Maybe you should go to Medical, make sure you're okay."</p>
			<p>Acton leans forward, tensed. The thing inside waits and watches.</p>
			<p>"This asshole—" Brander begins.</p>
			<p>"<i>Please</i>, Mike." It's the first time she has ever used his first name.</p>
			<p>There's a moment of silence.</p>
			<p>"Since when did <i>you</i> ever get involved?" he says behind her.</p>
			<p>It's a good question. Brander's footsteps shuffle away before she can think of an answer.</p>
			<p>Something in Acton goes back to sleep.</p>
			<p>"You'd better go there too," Clarke says to him. "Later."</p>
			<p>"Nah. It wasn't that tough. I was surprised how feeble it was, after I got over the <i>size</i> of the fucking thing."</p>
			<p>"It ripped your diveskin. If it could do that, it wasn't as weak as you think. At least check it out; your leg might be lacerated."</p>
			<p>"If you say so. Although I'll bet Brander needs Medical more than I do." He flashes a predatory grin, and moves to pass her.</p>
			<p>"You might also consider reining in your temper," she says as he brushes past.</p>
			<p>Acton stops. "Yeah. I was kind of hard on him, wasn't I?"</p>
			<p>"He won't be as eager to help you out the next time you get caught in a smoker."</p>
			<p>"Yeah," he says again. Then: "I don't know, I've always been sort of—you know—"</p>
			<p>She remembers a word someone else used, after the fact. "Impulsive?"</p>
			<p>"Right. But really I'm not that bad. You just have to get used to me."</p>
			<p>Clarke doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>"Anyhow," he says, "I guess I owe your friend an apology."</p>
			<p><i>My friend</i>. And by the time she gets over that jarring idea, she's alone again.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Five hours later Acton's in Medical. Clarke passes the open hatchway and glances in; he sits on an examination table, his 'skin undone to the waist. There's something wrong with the image. She stops and leans through the hatch.</p>
			<p>Acton has opened himself up. She can see the flesh peeled back around the water intake, the places where meat turns to plastic, the tubes that carry blood and the ones that carry antifreeze. He holds a tool in one hand; it disappears into the cavity, the spinning thing on its tip whirring quietly.</p>
			<p>Acton hits a nerve somewhere, and jumps as if shocked.</p>
			<p>"Are you damaged?" Clarke asks.</p>
			<p>He looks up. "Oh. Hi."</p>
			<p>She points at his dissected thorax. "Did the gulper—"</p>
			<p>He shakes his head. "No. No, it just bruised my leg a bit. I'm just making some adjustments."</p>
			<p>"Adjustments?"</p>
			<p>"Fine-tuning." He smiles. "Settling-in stuff."</p>
			<p>It doesn't work. The smile is hollow, somehow. Muscles stretch lips in the usual way, but the gesture's imprisoned in the lower half of his face. Above it, his capped eyes stare cold as drifted snow, innocent of any topography. She wonders why it has never bothered her before, and realizes that this is the first time she's ever seen a Rifter smile.</p>
			<p>"That's not supposed to be necessary," she says.</p>
			<p>"What's not?" Acton's smile is beginning to wear on her.</p>
			<p>"Fine-tuning. We're supposed to be self-adjusting."</p>
			<p>"Exactly. I'm adjusting myself."</p>
			<p>"I mean—"</p>
			<p>"I know what you mean," Acton says. "I'm—customizing the job." His hand moves around inside his rib cage as if autonomous, tinkering. "I figure I can get better performance if I nudge the settings just a bit outside the approved specs."</p>
			<p>Clarke hears a brief, Lilliputian screech of metal against metal.</p>
			<p>"How?" she asks.</p>
			<p>Acton withdraws his hand, folds flesh back over the hole. "Not exactly sure yet." He runs another tool along the seam in his chest, sealing himself. He shrugs back into his 'skin, seals that as well. Now he's as whole as any rifter.</p>
			<p>"I'll let you know next time I go outside," he says, laying a casual hand on Clarke's shoulder as he squeezes past.</p>
			<p>She almost doesn't flinch.</p>
			<p>Acton stops. He seems to look right around her.</p>
			<p>"You're nervous," he says, slowly.</p>
			<p>"Am I."</p>
			<p>"You don't like being touched." His hand rests on her collarbone like an insult.</p>
			<p>She remembers: she has the same armor that he does. She relaxes fractionally. "It's not a general thing," she lies. "Just some people."</p>
			<p>Acton seems to weigh the jibe, decide whether it's worthy of a response. His hand withdraws.</p>
			<p>"Kind of an unfortunate quirk in a place as small as this," he says, turning away.</p>
			<p><i>Small?</i> <i>I've got the whole goddamn ocean!</i> But Acton's already climbing upstairs.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The new smoker is erupting again. Water shoots scalding from the chimney at the north end of the Throat, curdles and mixes with deep icy saline; microbes caught in the turbulence luminesce madly. The water fills with the hiss of unformed steam, aborted by the weight of three hundred atmospheres.</p>
			<p>Acton is ten meters above the seabed, awash in rippling blue light.</p>
			<p>She glides up from underneath. "Nakata said you were still out here," she buzzes at him. "She said you were waiting for this thing to go off."</p>
			<p>He doesn't even look at her. "Right."</p>
			<p>"You're lucky it did. You could have been waiting out here for days." Clarke turns away, aims herself at the generators.</p>
			<p>"And I think," Acton says, "it'll stop in a minute or two."</p>
			<p>She twists around and faces him. "Look, all these eruptions are..." she rummages for the word, "chaotic."</p>
			<p>"Uh huh."</p>
			<p>"You can't predict them."</p>
			<p>"Hey, the Pompeii worms can predict them. The clams and brachyurans can predict them. Why not me?"</p>
			<p>"What are you talking about?"</p>
			<p>"They can tell when something's going to blow. Take a look around sometime, you'll see for yourself. They react before it even happens."</p>
			<p>She looks around. The clams are acting just like clams. The worms are acting just like worms. The brachyurans scurry around the bottom the way brachyurans always do. "React how?"</p>
			<p>"Makes sense, after all. These vents can feed them or parboil them. After a few million years they've learned to read the signs, right?"</p>
			<p>The smoker hiccoughs. The plume wavers, light dimming at its edges.</p>
			<p>Acton looks at his wrist. "Not bad."</p>
			<p>"Lucky guess," Clarke says, her vocoder hiding uncertainty.</p>
			<p>The smoker manages a couple of feeble bursts and subsides completely.</p>
			<p>Acton drifts closer. "You know, when they first sent me down here I thought this place would be a real shithole. I figured I'd just knuckle down and do my time and get out. But it's not like that. You know what I mean, Lenie?"</p>
			<p><i>I know.</i> But she doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>"I thought so," he says, as though she has. "It's really kind of...well, beautiful, in a way. Even the monsters, once you get to know 'em. We're all beautiful."</p>
			<p>He seems almost gentle.</p>
			<p>Clarke dredges her memory for some sort of defense. "You couldn't have known," she says. "Way too many variables. It's not computable. Nothing down here's computable."</p>
			<p>An alien creature looks down at her and shrugs. "Computable? Probably not. But <i>knowable</i>..."</p>
			<p><i>There's no time for this</i>, Clarke tells herself. <i>I've got to get to work.</i></p>
			<p>"...that's something else again," Acton says.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She never figured him for a bookworm. Still, there he is again, plugged into the library. Stray light from the eyephones leaks across his cheeks.</p>
			<p>He seems to be spending a lot of time in there these days. Almost as much time as he spends outside.</p>
			<p>Clarke glances down at the flatscreen as she wanders past. It's dark.</p>
			<p>"Chemistry," Brander says from across the lounge.</p>
			<p>She looks at him.</p>
			<p>Brander jerks his thumb at the oblivious Acton. "That's what he's into. Weird shit. Boring as hell."</p>
			<p><i>That's what Ballard was into, just before...</i> Clarke fingers a spare headset from the next terminal.</p>
			<p>"Ooh, you're walking a fine line there," Brander remarks. "Mr. Acton doesn't <i>like</i> people reading over his shoulder."</p>
			<p><i>Then Mr. Acton will be in privacy mode and I won't be able to.</i> She sits down and slips the headset on. Acton has not invoked privacy; Clarke taps into his line without any trouble. The eyephone lasers etch text and formulae across her retinas. Serotonin. Acetylcholine. Neuropeptide moderation. Brander's right: it's really boring.</p>
			<p>Someone's touching her.</p>
			<p>She does not yank the headset off. She removes it calmly. She doesn't even flinch, this time. She will not give him the satisfaction.</p>
			<p>Acton has turned in his chair to face her, headset dangling around his neck. His hand is on her knee.</p>
			<p>"Glad to see we have common interests," he says quietly. "Not that surprising, though. We do share a certain ... chemistry..."</p>
			<p>"That's true." She stares back, safe behind her eyecaps. "Too bad I'm allergic to shitheads."</p>
			<p>He smiles. "Of course, it would never work. The ages are all wrong." He stands up, returns the headset to its hook.</p>
			<p>"I'm not nearly old enough to be your father."</p>
			<p>He crosses the lounge and climbs downstairs.</p>
			<p>"What an asshole," Brander remarks.</p>
			<p>"He's more of a prick than Fischer ever was. I'm surprised you're not picking fights with <i>him</i> all the time."</p>
			<p>Brander shrugs. "Different dynamic. Acton's just an asshole. Fischer was a fucking <i>pervert</i>."</p>
			<p><i>Not to mention that Fischer never fought back.</i> She keeps the insight to herself.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Concentric circles, glowing emerald. Beebe Station sits on the bullseye. Intermittent blobs of weaker light litter the display: fissures and jagged rock outcroppings, endless muddy plains, the Euclidean outlines of human machinery all reduced to a common acoustic currency.</p>
			<p>There's something else out there too, part Euclid, part Darwin. Clarke zooms in. Human flesh is too much like seawater to return an echo, but bones show up okay. The machinery inside is even clearer, it shouts at the faintest sonar signal. Clarke focuses the display, points at a translucent green skeleton with clockwork in its chest.</p>
			<p>"That him?" Caraco says.</p>
			<p>Clarke shakes her head.</p>
			<p>"Maybe it is. Everyone else is—"</p>
			<p>"It's not him." Clarke touches a control. The display zooms back to maximum range. "You sure he's not in his quarters?"</p>
			<p>"He left the station seven hours ago. Hasn't been back since."</p>
			<p>"Maybe he's just hugging the bottom. Maybe he's behind a rock."</p>
			<p>"Maybe." Caraco sounds unconvinced.</p>
			<p>Clarke leans back in her chair. The back of her head touches the rear wall of the cubby. "Well, he's doing his job okay. When he's off shift he can go wherever he likes, I guess."</p>
			<p>"Yeah, but this is the third time. He's always <i>late</i>. He just wanders in whenever he likes—"</p>
			<p>"So what?" Clarke, suddenly tired, rubs the bridge of her nose between thumb and forefinger. "We don't run on dryback schedules here, you know that. He pulls his weight, don't fuck with him."</p>
			<p>"Well, Fischer was always getting shit for being l—"</p>
			<p>"Nobody cared if Fischer was late," Clarke cuts in. "They just— wanted an excuse."</p>
			<p>Caraco leans forward. "I don't like him," she confides.</p>
			<p>"Acton? No reason you should. He's psycho. We all are, remember?"</p>
			<p>"But he's different, somehow. You know that."</p>
			<p>"Lubin nearly killed his wife down at Galapagos before they assigned him here. Brander's got a history of attempted suicide."</p>
			<p>Something changes in Caraco's stance. Clarke can't be sure, but the other woman's gaze seems to have dropped to the deck. <i>Touched a nerve there, I guess.</i></p>
			<p>She continues, more gently. "You're not worried about the rest of us, are you? So what's so special about Acton?"</p>
			<p>"Oh," Caraco says. "Look."</p>
			<p>On the tactical display, something has just moved into range.</p>
			<p>Clarke zooms in on the new reading; it's too distant for good resolution, but there's no mistaking the hard metallic blip in its center.</p>
			<p>"Acton," she says.</p>
			<p>"Um...how far?" Caraco asks in a hesitant voice.</p>
			<p>Clarke checks. "He's about nine hundred meters out. Not too bad, if he's using a squid."</p>
			<p>"He's not. He never does."</p>
			<p>"Hmm. At least he seems to be beelining in." Clarke looks up at Caraco. "You two are on shift when?"</p>
			<p>"Ten minutes."</p>
			<p>"No big deal. He'll be fifteen minutes late. Half hour tops."</p>
			<p>Caraco stares at the display. "What's he <i>doing</i> out there?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know," Clarke says. She wonders, not for the first time, if Caraco really belongs down here. She just doesn't seem to get it, sometimes.</p>
			<p>"I was wondering if you could maybe talk to him," Caraco says.</p>
			<p>"Acton? Why?"</p>
			<p>"Nothing. Forget it."</p>
			<p>"Okay." Clarke rises from the Communications chair. Caraco backs out of the hatchway to let her past.</p>
			<p>"Um, Lenie..."</p>
			<p>Clarke turns.</p>
			<p>"What about you?" Caraco asks.</p>
			<p>"Me?"</p>
			<p>"You said Lubin nearly killed his wife. Brander tried to kill himself. What did you do, I mean, to...qualify?"</p>
			<p>Clarke watches her steadily.</p>
			<p>"I mean, I guess, if it's not too—"</p>
			<p>"You don't understand," Clarke says, her voice absolutely level. "It's not how much shit you've raised that suits you for the rift. It's how much you've survived."</p>
			<p>"I'm sorry." Caraco manages, with eyes utterly devoid of feeling, to look abashed.</p>
			<p>Clarke softens a bit. "In my case," she says, "Mostly I just learned to roll with the punches. I haven't done much worth bragging about, you know?"</p>
			<p><i>I'm sure enough working on it, though.</i></p>
			<hr/>
			<p>She doesn't know how it could have happened so fast. He's been here only two weeks, yet the 'lock can barely contain his eagerness to get outside. The chamber floods, she feels a single shiver scurry along his body; and before she can move, Acton hits the latch and they drop outside.</p>
			<p>He coasts out from under the station, his trajectory an effortless parallel of her own. Clarke fins off towards the Throat. She feels Acton at her side, although she cannot see him. His headlamp, like hers, stays dark; for her it's become a gesture of respect to the more delicate lanterns that dwell here.</p>
			<p>She doesn't know what Acton's reasoning is.</p>
			<p>He doesn't speak until Beebe's a dirty yellow smudge behind them. "Sometimes I wonder why we ever go back inside."</p>
			<p>It can't be happiness in that voice. How could any emotion make it through the mechanical gauntlet that lets people speak out here?</p>
			<p>"I fell asleep near the Throat yesterday," he says.</p>
			<p>"You're lucky something didn't eat you," she tells him.</p>
			<p>"They're not so bad. You just have to know how to relate to them."</p>
			<p>Clarke wonders if he relates to other species with the same subtlety that he relates to his own. She keeps the question to herself.</p>
			<p>They swim through sparse, living starlight for a while. Another smudge glimmers ahead, weak and sullen; the Throat, dead on target. It's been months now since Clarke has even thought of the guide rope that's supposed to lead them back and forth, like blind troglodytes. She knows where it is, but she never uses it. Other senses come awake down here. Rifters don't get lost.</p>
			<p>Except Fischer, maybe. And Fischer was lost long before he came down here<i>.</i></p>
			<p>"So what happened to Fischer, anyway?" Acton says.</p>
			<p>The chill starts in her chest, reaches her fingers before the sound of Acton's voice has died away. <i>It's a coincidence. It's a perfectly normal question to ask.</i></p>
			<p>"I said—"</p>
			<p>"He disappeared," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>"They told me that much," Acton buzzes back. "I thought you might have a bit more insight."</p>
			<p>"Maybe he fell asleep outside. Maybe something ate him."</p>
			<p>"I doubt that."</p>
			<p>"Really? And what makes you such an expert, Acton? You've been down here for what, two weeks now?"</p>
			<p>"Only two weeks? Seems longer. Time stretches when you're outside, doesn't it?"</p>
			<p>"At first," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>"You know why Fischer disappeared?"</p>
			<p>"No."</p>
			<p>"He outlived his usefulness."</p>
			<p>"Ah." Her machine parts turn it into half creak, half growl.</p>
			<p>"I'm serious, Lenie." Acton's mechanical voice does not change. "You think they're going to let you stay down here forever? You think they'd let people like us down here at all if they had any choice?"</p>
			<p>She stops kicking. Her body continues to coast. "What are you talking about?"</p>
			<p>"Use your head, Lenie. You're smarter than I am, inside at least. You've got the keys to the city here—you've got the keys to the whole fucking seaboard, and you're still acting like a victim." Acton's vocoder gurgles indecipherably—a laugh, mistransposed? A snarl?</p>
			<p>More words: "They count on that, you know."</p>
			<p>Clarke starts kicking again, stares ahead to the brightening glow of the Throat.</p>
			<p>It isn't there.</p>
			<p>There's a moment's disorientation — <i>We can't be lost, we were headed right for it, has the power gone out?</i> — before she sees the familiar streak of coarse yellow light, bearing four o'clock.</p>
			<p><i>How could I have gotten turned around like that?</i></p>
			<p>"We're here," Acton says.</p>
			<p>"No. The Throat's way over—"</p>
			<p>A nova flares beside her, drenching the abyss with blinding light. It takes Clarke's eyecaps a moment to adjust; when the starbursts have faded from her eyes, the ocean is a muddy black backdrop for the bright cone from Acton's headlamp.</p>
			<p>"Don't," she says. "It gets so dark when you do that, you can't see anything—"</p>
			<p>"I know. I'll turn it off in a moment. Just look."</p>
			<p>His beam shines down on a small rocky outcropping rising from the mud, no more than two meters across. Jagged cookie-cutter flowers litter its surface, radial clusters shining garish red and blue in the artificial light. Some of them lie flat along the rock face. Others are contorted into frozen calcareous knots, clenched around things Clarke can't see.</p>
			<p>Some of them move, slowly.</p>
			<p>"You brought me out here to look at starfish?" She tries, and fails, to squeeze some hint of bored contempt through the vocodor. But inside there's a distant, frightened amazement that he <i>has</i> led her here, that she could be guided, utterly unsuspecting, so completely off course. <i>And how did he find this place? No sonar pistol, compass doesn't work worth shit this close to the Throat...</i></p>
			<p>"I figured you probably hadn't looked at them very closely before," Acton says. "I thought you might be interested."</p>
			<p>"We don't have time for this, Acton."</p>
			<p>His hands reach down into the light and lock onto one of the starfish. They peel it slowly from the rock; there are filaments of some kind along the creature's underside, anchoring it to the substrate. Acton's efforts tear them free, a few at a time.</p>
			<p>He holds the animal up for Clarke's inspection. Its upper surface is colored stone, encrusted with calcareous spicules. Acton flips it over. The underside writhes with hundreds of thick squirming threads, jammed into dense rows along the length of each arm. Each thread has a tiny sucker at its tip.</p>
			<p>"A starfish," Acton tells her, "is the ultimate democracy."</p>
			<p>Clarke stares, quietly repelled.</p>
			<p>"This is how they move," Acton is saying. "They walk along on all these tube feet. But the weird thing is, they have no brains at all. Not surprising for a democracy."</p>
			<p>Rows of squirming maggots. A forest of translucent leeches, groping blindly into the water.</p>
			<p>"So there's nothing to coordinate the tube feet, they all move independently. Usually that's not a problem; they all tend to go towards food, for example. But it's not unusual for a third of these feet to be pulling in some other direction entirely. The whole animal's a living tug-o-war. Sometimes, some really stubborn tube feet just don't give up, and they literally get torn out at the roots when the others move the body someplace they don't want to go. But hey: majority rules, right?"</p>
			<p>Clarke extends a tentative finger. Half a dozen tube feet latch onto it. She can't feel them through her 'skin. Anchored, they look almost delicate, like filaments of milky glass.</p>
			<p>"But that's nothing," Acton says. "Watch this."</p>
			<p>He rips the starfish in half.</p>
			<p>Clarke pulls back, shocked and angry. But there's something in Acton's posture, in that barely visible outline behind his lamp, that makes her pause.</p>
			<p>"Don't worry, Lenie," he says. "I haven't killed it. I've <i>bred</i> it."</p>
			<p>He drops the torn halves. They flutter like leaves to the seabed, trailing bits of bloodless entrail.</p>
			<p>"They regenerate. Didn't you know that? You can tear them into pieces and each piece grows back the missing parts. It takes time, but they recover. Only you end up with more of them. Damn hard to kill these guys.</p>
			<p>"Understand, Lenie? Tear them to pieces, they come back stronger."</p>
			<p>"How do you know all this?" she asks in a metallic whisper. "Where do you come from?"</p>
			<p>He lays an icy black hand on her arm. "Right here. This is where I was born."</p>
			<p>She doesn't think it absurd. In fact, she barely hears him. Her mind is somewhere else entirely, terrified by a sudden realization.</p>
			<p>Acton is touching her, and she doesn't mind.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Of course, the sex is electric. It always is. The familiar has reasserted itself, here in the cramped space of Clarke's cubby. They can't both lie on the pallet at the same time but they manage somehow, Acton on his knees, then Clarke, squirming around each other in a metal nest lined with ducts and vents and bundles of optical cabling. They navigate each others' seams and scars, tonguing puckers of metal and pale flesh, unseen and all-seeing behind their corneal armor.</p>
			<p>For Clarke it's a new twist, this icy ecstasy of a lover without eyes. For the first time she feels no need to avert her face, no threat to fragile intimacy; at first, when Acton moved to take out his caps, she stopped him with a touch and a whisper and he seemed to understand.</p>
			<p>They cannot lie together afterwards so they sit side-by-side, leaning into each other, staring at the hatch two meters in front of them. The lights are turned too low for dryback vision; Clarke and Acton see a room suffused in pale fluorescence.</p>
			<p>Acton reaches out and fingers a shard of glass sticking from an empty frame on one wall. "There used to be a mirror here," he remarks.</p>
			<p>Clarke nibbles his shoulder. "There were mirrors everywhere. I—took them down."</p>
			<p>"Why? A few mirrors would open the place up a bit. Make it larger."</p>
			<p>She points. Several torn wires, fine as threads, hang from a hole in the frame. "They had cameras behind them. I didn't like that."</p>
			<p>Acton grunts. "I don't blame you."</p>
			<p>They sit without speaking for a bit.</p>
			<p>"You said something outside," she says. "You said you were born down here."</p>
			<p>Acton hesitates, then nods. "Ten days ago."</p>
			<p>"What did you mean?"</p>
			<p>"You should know," he says. "You witnessed my birth."</p>
			<p>She thinks back. "That was when the gulper got you..."</p>
			<p>"Close." Acton grins his cold eyeless grin, puts an arm around her. "Actually, the gulper sort of catalyzed it, if I remember. Think of it as a midwife."</p>
			<p>An image pops into her mind: Acton in Medical, vivisecting himself.</p>
			<p>"Fine-tuning," she says.</p>
			<p>"Uh huh." He gives her a squeeze. "And I've got you to thank for it. You gave me the idea."</p>
			<p>"Me?"</p>
			<p>"You were my mother, Len. And my father was this spastic little shrimp that ended up way over its head. He died before I was born, actually: I killed him. You weren't very happy about that."</p>
			<p>Clarke shakes her head. "You're not making sense."</p>
			<p>"You telling me you haven't noticed the change? You telling me I'm the same person I was when I came down?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know," she says. "Maybe I've just gotten to know you better."</p>
			<p>"Maybe. Maybe I have too. I don't know, Len, I just seem more...<i>awake</i> now, I guess. I see things differently. You must have noticed."</p>
			<p>"Yeah, but only when you're—"</p>
			<p><i>Outside.</i></p>
			<p>"You did something to your inhibitors," she whispers.</p>
			<p>"Reduced the dosage a bit."</p>
			<p>She grasps his arm. "Karl, those chemicals keep you from spazzing out every time you go outside. You fuck with this stuff, you're risking a seizure as soon as the 'lock floods."</p>
			<p>"I <i>have</i> been fucking with it, Lenie. You see any change in me that isn't an improvement?"</p>
			<p>She doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>"It's all about action potential," he tells her. "Your nerves have to build up a certain charge before they can fire—"</p>
			<p>"And at this depth they'd fire all the time, Karl, please—"</p>
			<p>"Shh." He lays a gentle finger on her lips but she brushes it away, suddenly angry.</p>
			<p>"I'm serious, Karl. Without those drugs your nerves short-circuit, you burn out, I <i>know</i>—"</p>
			<p>"You only know what they tell you," he snaps. "Why don't you try working things out yourself for once?"</p>
			<p>She falls silent, stung by his disapproval. A space opens between them on the pallet.</p>
			<p>"I'm not a fool, Lenie," Acton says, more quietly. "I just reduced the settings a bit. Five percent. Now, when I go outside it takes a bit less of a stimulus for my nerves to fire, that's all. It...it wakes you up, Len; I'm more aware of things, I'm more alive somehow."</p>
			<p>She watches him, unspeaking.</p>
			<p>"Of course they <i>say</i> it's dangerous," he says. "They're scared shitless of you already. You think they're going to give you even more of an edge?"</p>
			<p>"They're not scared of us, Karl."</p>
			<p>"They should be." His arm goes back around her. "Wanna try it?"</p>
			<p>It's as though she's suddenly outside, still naked. "No."</p>
			<p>"There's nothing to worry about, Len. I've already done the guinea pig work on myself. Open up to me and I could make the adjustments myself, it'd take ten minutes."</p>
			<p>"I'm not up for it, Karl. Not yet, anyway. Maybe one of the others is."</p>
			<p>He shakes his head. "They don't trust me."</p>
			<p>"You can't blame them."</p>
			<p>"I don't." He grins, showing teeth as sharp and white as eyecaps. "But even if they did trust me, they wouldn't do anything unless you thought it was okay."</p>
			<p>She looks at him. "Why not?"</p>
			<p>"You're in charge here, Len."</p>
			<p>"Bullshit. They never told you that."</p>
			<p>"They didn't have to. It's obvious."</p>
			<p>"I've been down here longer than them. So's Lubin. That doesn't matter to anyone."</p>
			<p>Acton frowns briefly. "No, I don't think it does. But you're still leader of the pack, Len. Head wolf. A-fucking-kayla."</p>
			<p>Clarke shakes her head. She searches her memory for something, anything, that would contradict Acton's absurd claim. She comes up empty.</p>
			<p>She feels a little sick inside.</p>
			<p>He gives her a little squeeze. "Tough luck, lover. I guess the clothes don't fit so well after being a career victim your whole life, eh?"</p>
			<p>Clarke stares at the deck.</p>
			<p>"Think about it, anyway," Acton whispers in her ear. "I guarantee you'll feel twice as alive as you do now."</p>
			<p>"That happens anyway," Clarke reminds him. "Whenever I go outside. I don't need to screw up my internals for that." <i>Not those internals, anyway.</i></p>
			<p>"This is different," he insists.</p>
			<p>She looks at him and smiles, and hopes he doesn't push it. <i>How can he expect me to let him cut me open like that?</i> she wonders, and then wonders if maybe someday she will, if the fear of losing him might somehow grow large enough to force her other fears into submission. It wouldn't be the first time.</p>
			<p>Twice as alive, Acton says. Hiding behind her smile, Clarke considers: twice as much of her life. Not a great prospect, so far.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>There's a light from behind; it chases her shadow out along the seabed. She can't remember how long it's been there. She feels a momentary chill—</p>
			<p>—<i>Fischer?—</i></p>
			<p>—before common sense sets in. Gerry Fischer wouldn't use a headlamp.</p>
			<p>"Lenie?"</p>
			<p>She revolves on her own axis, sees a silhouette hovering a few meters away. Cyclopean light glares from its forehead. Clarke hears a subvocal buzz, the corrupted equivalent of Brander clearing his throat. "Judy said you were out here," he explains.</p>
			<p>"Judy." She means it as a question, but her vocoder loses the intonation.</p>
			<p>"Yeah. She sort of, keeps tabs on you sometimes."</p>
			<p>Clarke considers that a moment. "Tell her I'm harmless."</p>
			<p>"It's not like that," he buzzes. "I think she just ... worries..."</p>
			<p>Clarke feels muscles twitching at the corners of her mouth. She thinks she might be smiling.</p>
			<p>"So I guess we're on shift," she says, after a moment.</p>
			<p>The headlight bobs up and down. "Right. A bunch of clams need their asses scraped. More skilled labor."</p>
			<p>She stretches, weightless. "Okay. Let's go."</p>
			<p>"Lenie..."</p>
			<p>She looks up at him.</p>
			<p>"Why do you come— I mean, why <i>here</i>?" Brander's headlight sweeps the bottom, comes to rest on an outcropping of bone and rotted flesh. A skeletal smile stitches its way across the lit circle. "Did you kill it, or something?"</p>
			<p>"Yeah, I—" She falls silent, realizing: <i>He means the whale.</i></p>
			<p>"Nah," she says instead. "It just died on its own."</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Of course she wakes up alone. They still try to sleep together sometimes, after sex has made them too lazy to go outside. But the bunk is too small. The most they can manage is a sort of diagonal slouch: feet on the floor, necks bent up against the bulkhead, Acton cradling her like a living hammock. If they're unlucky they really do fall asleep like that. It takes hours to get the kinks out afterwards. Way more trouble than it's worth.</p>
			<p>So she wakes up alone. But she misses him anyway.</p>
			<p>It's early. The schedules handed down from the GA are increasingly irrelevant — circadian rhythms lose their way in the incessant darkness, fall slowly out of phase — but the rubbery timetable that remains leaves hours before her shift starts. Lenie Clarke is awake in the middle of the night. It seems like a stupid and obvious thing to say, months from the nearest sunrise, but right now it seems especially true.</p>
			<p>In the corridor she turns for a moment in the direction of his cubby before she remembers. He's never in there any more. He's never even inside, unless he's eating or working or being with her. He hasn't slept in his quarters almost since they got involved. He's getting almost as bad as Lubin.</p>
			<p>Caraco is sitting silently in the lounge, unmoving, obeying her own inner clock. She looks up as Clarke crosses to Comm.</p>
			<p>"He went out about an hour ago," she says softly.</p>
			<p>Sonar picks him up fifty meters southeast, barely echoing above the bottom clutter. Clarke heads for the ladder.</p>
			<p>"He showed us something the other day," Caraco says after her. "Ken and me."</p>
			<p>Clarke looks back.</p>
			<p>"A smoker, way off in one corner of the Throat. It had this weird fluted vent, and it made singing sounds, almost..."</p>
			<p>"Mmm."</p>
			<p>"He really wanted us to know about it, for some reason. He was really excited. He's — he's kind of strange out there, Lenie..."</p>
			<p>"Judy," Clarke says neutrally, "Why are you telling me this?"</p>
			<p>Caraco looks away. "Sorry. I didn't mean anything."</p>
			<p>Clarke starts down the ladder.</p>
			<p>"Just be careful, okay?" Caraco calls after her.</p>
			<p>He's curled up when Clarke reaches him, knees tucked under his chin, floating a few centimeters above a stone garden. His eyes are open, of course. She reaches out, touches him through two layers of reflex copolymer.</p>
			<p>He barely stirs. His vocoder emits sporadic ticking noises.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke curls herself around him. In a womb of freezing sea water, they sleep on until morning.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
