<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Niche</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-1" id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">A Niche</h4>
			<p>Beebe Station floats tethered above the seabed, a gunmetal-gray planet ringed by a belt of equatorial floodlights. There's an airlock for divers at the south pole and a docking hatch for 'scaphes at the north. In between there are girders and anchor lines, conduits and cables, metal armor and Lenie Clarke.</p>
			<p>She's doing a routine visual check on the hull; standard procedure, once a week. Ballard is inside, testing some equipment in the communications cubby. This is not entirely within the spirit of the buddy system. Clarke prefers it this way. Relations have been civil over the past couple of days—Ballard even resurrects her patented chumminess on occasion—but the more time they spend together, the more forced things get. Eventually, Clarke knows, something is going to break.</p>
			<p>Besides, out here it seems only natural to be alone.</p>
			<p>She's examining a cable clamp when a razormouth charges into the light. It's about two meters long, and hungry. It rams directly into the nearest of Beebe's floodlamps, mouth agape. Several teeth shatter against the crystal lens. The razormouth twists to one side, knocking the hull with its tail, and swims off until barely visible against the dark.</p>
			<p>Clarke watches, fascinated. The razormouth swims back and forth, back and forth, then charges again.</p>
			<p>The flood weathers the impact easily, doing more damage to its attacker. Over and over again the fish batters itself against the light. Finally, exhausted, it sinks twitching down to the muddy bottom.</p>
			<p>"Lenie? Are you okay?"</p>
			<p>Clarke feels the words buzzing in her lower jaw. She trips the sender in her diveskin: "I'm okay."</p>
			<p>"I heard something out there," Ballard says. "I just wanted to make sure you were—"</p>
			<p>"I'm fine," Clarke says. "Just a fish."</p>
			<p>"They never learn, do they?"</p>
			<p>"No. I guess not. See you later."</p>
			<p>"See—"</p>
			<p>Clarke switches off her receiver.</p>
			<p><i>Poor stupid fish</i>. How many millennia did it take for them to learn that bioluminescence equals food? How long will Beebe have to sit here before they learn that electric light doesn't?</p>
			<p><i>We could keep our headlights off.</i> <i>Maybe they'd leave us alone—</i></p>
			<p>She stares out past Beebe's electric halo. There is so much blackness there. It almost hurts to look at it. Without lights, without sonar, how far could she go into that viscous shroud and still return?</p>
			<p>Clarke kills her headlight. Night edges a bit closer, but Beebe's lights keep it at bay. Clarke turns until she's face to face with the darkness. She crouches like a spider against Beebe's hull.</p>
			<p>She pushes off.</p>
			<p>The darkness embraces her. She swims, not looking back, until her legs grow tired. She doesn't know how far she's come.</p>
			<p>But it must be light-years. The ocean is full of stars.</p>
			<p>Behind her, the station shines brightest, with coarse yellow rays. In the opposite direction, she can barely make out the Throat, an insignificant sunrise on the horizon.</p>
			<p>Everywhere else, living constellations punctuate the dark. Here, a string of pearls blink sexual advertisements at two-second intervals. Here, a sudden flash leaves diversionary afterimages swarming across Clarke's field of view; something flees under cover of her momentary blindness. There, a counterfeit worm twists lazily in the current, invisibly tied to the roof of some predatory mouth.</p>
			<p>There are so many of them.</p>
			<p>She feels a sudden surge in the water, as if something big has just passed very close. A delicious thrill dances through her body.</p>
			<p><i>It nearly touched me,</i> she thinks. <i>I wonder what it was.</i> The rift is full of monsters who don't know when to quit. It doesn't matter how much they eat. Their voracity is as much a part of them as their elastic bellies, their unhinging jaws. Ravenous dwarves attack giants twice their own size, and sometimes win. The abyss is a desert; no one can afford the luxury of waiting for better odds.</p>
			<p>But even a desert has oases, and sometimes the deep hunters find them. They come upon the malnourishing abundance of the rift and gorge themselves; their descendants grow huge and bloated over such delicate bones—</p>
			<p><i>My light was off, and it left me alone.</i> <i>I wonder—</i></p>
			<p>She turns it back on. Her vision clouds in the sudden glare, then clears. The ocean reverts to unrelieved black. No nightmares accost her. The beam lights empty water wherever she points it.</p>
			<p>She switches it off. There's a moment of absolute darkness while her eyecaps adjust to the reduced light. Then the stars come out again.</p>
			<p>They are so beautiful. Lenie Clarke rests on the bottom of the ocean and watches the abyss sparkle around her. And she almost laughs as she realizes, three thousand meters from the nearest sunlight, that it's only dark when the lights are on.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>"What the hell is wrong with you? You've been gone for over three hours, did you know that? Why didn't you answer me?"</p>
			<p>Clarke bends over and removes her fins. "I guess I turned my receiver off," she says. "I was—wait a second, did you say—"</p>
			<p>"You <i>guess</i>? Have you forgotten every safety reg they drilled into us? You're supposed to have your receiver on from the moment you leave Beebe until you get back!"</p>
			<p>"Did you say <i>three hours</i>?"</p>
			<p>"I couldn't even come out after you, I couldn't find you on sonar! I just had to sit here and hope you'd show up!"</p>
			<p>It only seems a few minutes since she pushed off into the darkness. Clarke climbs up into the lounge, suddenly chilled.</p>
			<p>"Where <i>were</i> you, Lenie?" Ballard demands, coming up behind her. Clarke hears the slightest plaintive tone in her voice.</p>
			<p>"I—I must've been on the bottom," Clarke says. "that's why sonar didn't get me. I didn't go far."</p>
			<p><i>Was I asleep?</i> <i>What was I doing for three hours?</i></p>
			<p>"I was just — wandering around. I lost track of the time. I'm sorry."</p>
			<p>"Not good enough. Don't do it again."</p>
			<p>There's a brief silence. It's ended by the sudden, familiar impact of flesh on metal.</p>
			<p>"Christ!" Ballard snaps. "I'm turning the externals off right now!"</p>
			<p>Whatever it is gets in two more hits by the time Ballard reaches Comm. Clarke hears her punch a couple of buttons.</p>
			<p>Ballard comes back into the lounge. "There. Now we're invisible."</p>
			<p>Something hits them again. And again.</p>
			<p>"Or maybe not," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>Ballard stands in the lounge, listening to the rhythm of the assault. "They don't show up on sonar," she says, almost whispering. "Sometimes, when I hear them coming at us, I tune it down to extreme close range. But it looks right through them."</p>
			<p>"No gas bladders. Nothing to bounce an echo off of."</p>
			<p>"We show up just fine out there, most of the time. But not those things. You can't find them, no matter how high you turn the gain. They're like ghosts."</p>
			<p>"They're not ghosts." Almost unconsciously, Clarke has been counting the beats: <i>eight — nine—</i></p>
			<p>Ballard turns to face her. "They've shut down Piccard," she says, and her voice is small and tight.</p>
			<p>"What?"</p>
			<p>"The grid office says it's just some technical problem. But I've got a friend in Personnel. I phoned him when you were outside. He says Lana's in the hospital. And I get the feeling—" Ballard shakes her head. "It sounded like Ken Lubin did something down there. I think maybe he attacked her."</p>
			<p>Three thumps from outside, in rapid succession. Clarke can feel Ballard's eyes on her. The silence stretches.</p>
			<p>"Or maybe not," Ballard says. "We got all those personality tests. If he was violent, they would've picked it up before they sent him down."</p>
			<p>Clarke watches her, listens to the pounding of an intermittent fist.</p>
			<p>"Or maybe — maybe the rift <i>changed</i> him somehow. Maybe they misjudged the pressure we'd all be under. So to speak." Ballard musters a feeble smile. "Not the physical danger so much as the emotional stress, you know? Everyday things. Just being outside could get to you after a while. Seawater sluicing through your chest. Not breathing for hours at a time. It's like—living without a heartbeat—"</p>
			<p>She looks up at the ceiling; the sounds from outside are a bit more erratic, now.</p>
			<p>"Outside's not so bad," Clarke says. <i>At least you're incompressible.</i> <i>At least you don't have to worry about the plates giving in.</i></p>
			<p>"I don't think you'd change suddenly. It would just sort of sneak up on you, little by little. And then one day you'd just wake up changed, you'd be different somehow, only you'd never have noticed the transition. Like Ken Lubin."</p>
			<p>She looks at Clarke, and her voice drops a bit.</p>
			<p>"And you."</p>
			<p>"Me." Clarke turns Ballard's words over in her mind, waits for the onset of some reaction. She feels nothing but her own indifference. "I don't think you have much to worry about. I'm not the violent type."</p>
			<p>"I know. I'm not worried about my own safety, Lenie. I'm worried about yours."</p>
			<p>Clarke looks at her from behind the impervious safety of her lenses, and doesn't answer.</p>
			<p>"You've changed since you came down here," Ballard says. "You're withdrawing from me, you're exposing yourself to unnecessary risks. I don't know exactly what's happening to you. It's almost like you're trying to kill yourself."</p>
			<p>"I'm not," Clarke says. She tries to change the subject. "Is Lana Cheung all right?"</p>
			<p>Ballard studies her for a moment. She takes the hint. "I don't know. I couldn't get any details."</p>
			<p>Clarke feels something knotting up inside her.</p>
			<p>"I wonder what she did to set him off?" she murmurs.</p>
			<p>Ballard stares at her, openmouthed. "What <i>she</i> did? I can't believe you said that!"</p>
			<p>"I only meant—"</p>
			<p>"I know what you meant."</p>
			<p>The outside pounding has stopped. Ballard does not relax. She stands hunched over in those strange, loose-fitting clothes that Drybacks wear, and stares at the ceiling as though she doesn't believe in the silence. She looks back at Clarke.</p>
			<p>"Lenie, you know I don't like to pull rank, but your attitude is putting both of us at risk. I think this place is really getting to you. I hope you can get back online here, I really do. Otherwise I may have to recommend you for a transfer."</p>
			<p>Clarke watches Ballard leave the lounge. <i>You're lying</i>, she realizes. <i>You're scared to death, and it's not just because I'm changing.</i></p>
			<p><i>It's because you are.</i></p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>Clarke finds out five hours after the fact: something has changed on the ocean floor.</p>
			<p><i>We sleep and the earth moves</i> she thinks, studying the topographic display. <i>And next time, or the time after, maybe it'll move right out from under us.</i></p>
			<p><i>I wonder if I'll have time to feel anything.</i></p>
			<p>She turns at a sound behind her. Ballard is standing in the lounge, swaying slightly. Her face seems somehow disfigured by the concentric rings in her eyes, by the dark hollows around them. Naked eyes are beginning to look alien to Clarke.</p>
			<p>"The seabed shifted," Clarke says. "There's a new outcropping about two hundred meters west of us."</p>
			<p>"That's odd. I didn't feel anything."</p>
			<p>"It happened about five hours ago. You were asleep."</p>
			<p>Ballard glances up sharply. Clarke studies the haggard lines of her face. <i>On second thought...</i></p>
			<p>"I — would've woken up," Ballard says. She squeezes past Clarke into the cubby and checks the topographic display.</p>
			<p>"Two meters high, twelve long," Clarke recites.</p>
			<p>Ballard doesn't answer. She punches some commands into a keyboard; the topographic image dissolves, reforms into a column of numbers.</p>
			<p>"Just as I thought," she says. "No heavy seismic activity for over forty-two hours."</p>
			<p>"Sonar doesn't lie," Clarke says calmly.</p>
			<p>"Neither does seismo," Ballard answers.</p>
			<p>There's a brief silence. There's a standard procedure for such things, and they both know what it is.</p>
			<p>"We have to check it out," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>But Ballard only nods. "Give me a moment to change."</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>They call it a squid; a jet-propelled cylinder about a meter long, with a headlight at the front end and a towbar at the back. Clarke, floating between Beebe and the seabed, checks it over with one hand. Her other hand grips a sonar pistol. She points the pistol into blackness; ultrasonic clicks sweep the night, give her a bearing.</p>
			<p>"That way," she says, pointing.</p>
			<p>Ballard squeezes down on her own squid's towbar. The machine pulls her away. After a moment Clarke follows. Bringing up the rear, a third squid carries an assortment of sensors in a nylon bag.</p>
			<p>Ballard's traveling at nearly full throttle. The lamps on her helmet and squid stab the water like twin lighthouse beacons. Clarke, her own lights doused, catches up about halfway to their destination. They cruise along a couple of meters over the muddy substrate.</p>
			<p>"Your lights," Ballard says.</p>
			<p>"We don't need them. Sonar works in the dark."</p>
			<p>"Are you breaking regs for the sheer thrill of it, now?"</p>
			<p>"The fish down here, they key on things that glow—"</p>
			<p>"Turn your lights on. That's an order."</p>
			<p>Clarke doesn't answer. She watches the beams beside her, Ballard's squid shining steady and unwavering, Ballard's headlamp slicing the water in erratic arcs as she moves her head—</p>
			<p>"I told you," Ballard says, "turn your—<i>Christ!</i>"</p>
			<p>It was just a glimpse, caught for a moment in the sweep of Ballard's headlight. She jerks her head around and it slides back out of sight. Then it looms up in the squid's beam, huge and terrible.</p>
			<p>The abyss is grinning at them, teeth bared.</p>
			<p>A mouth stretches across the width of the beam, extends into darkness on either side. It is crammed with conical teeth the size of human hands, and they do not look the least bit fragile.</p>
			<p>Ballard makes a strangled sound and dives into the mud. The benthic ooze boils up around her in a seething cloud; she disappears in a torrent of planktonic corpses.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke stops and waits, unmoving. She stares transfixed at that threatening smile. Her whole body feels electrified, she's never been so explicitly aware of herself. Every nerve fires and freezes at the same time. She is terrified.</p>
			<p>But she's also, somehow, completely in control of herself. She reflects on this paradox as Ballard's abandoned squid slows and stops itself, scant meters from that endless row of teeth. She wonders at her own analytical clarity as the third squid, with its burden of sensors, decelerates past and takes up position beside Ballard's.</p>
			<p>There in the light, the grin does not change.</p>
			<p>Clarke raises her sonar pistol and fires. <i>We're here,</i> she realizes, checking the readout. <i>That's the outcropping.</i></p>
			<p>She swims closer. The smile hangs there, enigmatic and enticing. Now she can see bits of bone at the roots of the teeth, and tatters of decomposed flesh trailing from the gums.</p>
			<p>She turns and backtracks. The cloud on the seabed is starting to settle.</p>
			<p>"Ballard," she says in her synthetic voice.</p>
			<p>Nobody answers.</p>
			<p>Clarke reaches down through the mud, feeling blind, until she touches something warm and trembling.</p>
			<p>The seabed explodes in her face.</p>
			<p>Ballard erupts from the substrate, trailing a muddy comet's tail. Her hand rises from that sudden cloud, clasped around something glinting in the transient light. Clarke sees the knife, twists almost too late; the blade glances off her 'skin, igniting nerves along her ribcage. Ballard lashes out again. This time Clarke catches the knife-hand as it shoots past, twists it, pushes. Ballard tumbles away.</p>
			<p>"It's me!" Clarke shouts; the vocoder turns her voice into a tinny vibrato.</p>
			<p>Ballard rises up again, white eyes unseeing, knife still in hand.</p>
			<p>Clarke holds up her hands. "It's okay! There's nothing here! It's dead!"</p>
			<p>Ballard stops. She stares at Clarke. She looks over to the squids, to the smile they illuminate. She stiffens.</p>
			<p>"It's some kind of whale," Clarke says. "It's been dead a long time."</p>
			<p>"A — a whale?" Ballard rasps. She begins to shake.</p>
			<p><i>There's no need to feel embarrassed</i>, Clarke almost says, but doesn't. Instead, she reaches out and touches Ballard lightly on the arm. <i>Is this how you do it?</i>, she wonders.</p>
			<p>Ballard jerks back as if scalded.</p>
			<p><i>I guess not—</i></p>
			<p>"Um, Jeanette—" Clarke begins.</p>
			<p>Ballard raises a trembling hand, cutting Clarke off. "I'm okay. I want to g — I think we should get back now, don't you?"</p>
			<p>"Okay," Clarke says. But she doesn't really mean it.</p>
			<p>She could stay out here all day.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>Ballard is at the library again. She turns, passing a casual hand over the brightness control as Clarke comes up behind her; the display darkens before Clarke can see what it is. Clarke glances at the eyephones hanging from the terminal, puzzled. If Ballard doesn't want her to see what she's reading, she could just use those.</p>
			<p><i>But then she wouldn't see me coming...</i></p>
			<p>"I think maybe it was a Ziphiid," Ballard's saying. "A beaked whale. Except it had too many teeth. Very rare. They don't dive this deep."</p>
			<p>Clarke listens, not really interested.</p>
			<p>"It must have died and rotted further up, and then sank." Ballard's voice is slightly raised. She looks almost furtively at something on the other side of the lounge. "I wonder what the chances are of that happening."</p>
			<p>"What?"</p>
			<p>"I mean, in all the ocean, something that big just happening to drop out of the sky a few hundred meters away. The odds of that must be pretty low."</p>
			<p>"Yeah. I guess so." Clarke reaches over and brightens the display. One half of the screen glows softly with luminous text. The other holds the rotating image of a complex molecule.</p>
			<p>"What's this?" Clarke asks.</p>
			<p>Ballard steals another glance across the lounge. "Just an old biopsyche text the library had on file. I was browsing through it. Used to be an interest of mine."</p>
			<p>Clarke looks at her. "Uh huh." She bends over and studies the display. Some sort of technical chemistry. The only thing she really understands is the caption beneath the graphic.</p>
			<p>She reads it aloud: "True Happiness."</p>
			<p>"Yeah. A tricyclic with four side chains." Ballard points at the screen. "Whenever you're happy, really happy, that's what does it to you."</p>
			<p>"When did they find <i>that</i> out?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know. It's an old book."</p>
			<p>Clarke stares at the revolving simulacrum. It disturbs her, somehow. It floats there over that smug stupid caption, and it says something she doesn't want to hear.</p>
			<p><i>You've been solved</i>, it says. <i>You're mechanical.</i> <i>Chemicals and electricity.</i> <i>Everything you are, every dream, every action, it all comes down to a change of voltage somewhere, or a — what did she say — a tricyclic with four side chains—</i></p>
			<p>"It's wrong," Clarke murmurs. <i>Or they'd be able to fix us, when we broke down—</i></p>
			<p>"Sorry?" Ballard says.</p>
			<p>"It's saying we're just these — soft computers. With faces."</p>
			<p>Ballard shuts off the terminal.</p>
			<p>"That's right," she says. "And some of us may even be losing those."</p>
			<p>The jibe registers, but it doesn't hurt. Clarke straightens and moves towards the ladder.</p>
			<p>"Where you going? You going outside again?" Ballard asks.</p>
			<p>"The shift isn't over. I thought I'd clean out the duct on number two."</p>
			<p>"It's a bit late to start on that, Lenie. The shift will be over before we're even half done." Ballard's eyes dart away again. This time Clarke follows the glance to the full-length mirror on the far wall.</p>
			<p>She sees nothing of particular interest there.</p>
			<p>"I'll work late." Clarke grabs the railing, swings her foot onto the top rung.</p>
			<p>"Lenie," Ballard says, and Clarke swears she hears a tremor in that voice. She looks back, but the other woman is moving to Comm. "Well, I'm afraid I can't go with you," she's saying. "I'm in the middle of debugging one of the telemetry routines."</p>
			<p>"That's fine," Clarke says. She feels the tension starting to rise. Beebe is shrinking again. She starts down the ladder.</p>
			<p>"Are you sure you're okay going out alone? Maybe you should wait until tomorrow."</p>
			<p>"No. I'm okay."</p>
			<p>"Well, remember to keep your receiver open. I don't want you getting lost on me again—"</p>
			<p>Clarke is in the wetroom. She climbs into the airlock and runs through the ritual. It no longer feels like drowning. It feels like being born again.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>She awakens into darkness, and the sound of weeping.</p>
			<p>She lies there for a few minutes, confused and uncertain. The sobs come from all sides, soft but omnipresent in Beebe's resonant shell. She hears nothing else except her own heartbeat.</p>
			<p>She's afraid. She's not sure why. She wishes the sounds would go away.</p>
			<p>Clarke rolls off her bunk and fumbles at the hatch. It opens into a semi-darkened corridor; meager light escapes from the lounge at one end. The sounds come from the other direction, from deepening darkness. She follows them through an infestation of pipes and conduits.</p>
			<p>Ballard's quarters. The hatch is open. An emerald readout sparkles in the darkness, bestowing no detail upon the hunched figure on the pallet.</p>
			<p>"Ballard," Clarke says softly. She doesn't want to go in.</p>
			<p>The shadow moves, seems to look up at her. "Why won't you show it?" it says, its voice pleading.</p>
			<p>Clarke frowns in the darkness. "Show what?"</p>
			<p>"You know what! How — afraid you are!"</p>
			<p>"Afraid?"</p>
			<p>"Of being here, of being stuck at the bottom of this horrible dark ocean—"</p>
			<p>"I don't understand," Clarke whispers. Claustrophobia begins to stir in her, restless again.</p>
			<p>Ballard snorts, but the derision seems forced. "Oh, you understand all right. You think this is some sort of competition, you think if you can just keep it all inside you'll win somehow — but it isn't like that at all, Lenie, it isn't helping to keep it hidden like this, we've got to be able to trust each other down here or we're lost—"</p>
			<p>She shifts slightly on the bunk. Clarke's eyes, enhanced by the caps, can pick out some details now; rough edges embroider Ballard's silhouette, the folds and creases of normal clothing, unbuttoned to the waist. She thinks of a cadaver, half-dissected, rising on the table to mourn its own mutilation.</p>
			<p>"I don't know what you mean," Clarke says.</p>
			<p>"I've tried to be friendly," Ballard says. "I've tried to get along with you, but you're so <i>cold</i>, you won't even admit — I mean, you <i>couldn't</i> like it down here, nobody could, why can't you just admit—"</p>
			<p>"But I don't, I — I <i>hate</i> it in here. It's like Beebe's going to — to clench around me. And all I can do is wait for it to happen."</p>
			<p>Ballard nods in the darkness. "Yes, yes, I know what you mean." She seems somehow encouraged by Clarke's admission. "And no matter how much you tell yourself—" She stops. "You hate it <i>in here?</i>"</p>
			<p><i>Did I say something wrong?</i> Clarke wonders.</p>
			<p>"Outside is hardly any better, you know," Ballard says. "Outside is even worse! There's mudslides and smokers and giant fish trying to eat you all the time, you can't possibly — but — you don't mind all that, do you?"</p>
			<p>Somehow, her tone has turned accusing. Clarke shrugs.</p>
			<p>"No, you don't," Ballard is speaking slowly now. Her voice drops to a whisper: "You actually <i>like</i> it out there. Don't you?"</p>
			<p>Reluctantly, Clarke nods. "Yeah. I guess so."</p>
			<p>"But it's so — the rift can kill you, Lenie. It can kill <i>us</i>. A hundred different ways. Doesn't that scare you?"</p>
			<p>"I don't know. I don't think about it much. I guess it does, sort of."</p>
			<p>"Then why are you so happy out there?" Ballard cries. "It doesn't make any sense..."</p>
			<p><i>I'm not exactly 'happy'</i>, Clarke thinks. "I don't know. It's not that weird, lots of people do dangerous things. What about free-fallers? What about mountain climbers?"</p>
			<p>But Ballard doesn't answer. Her silhouette has grown rigid on the bed. Suddenly, she reaches over and turns on the cubby light.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke blinks against the sudden brightness. Then the room dims as her eyecaps darken.</p>
			<p>"Jesus Christ!" Ballard shouts at her. "You <i>sleep</i> in that fucking costume now?"</p>
			<p>It's something else Clarke hasn't thought about. It just seems easier.</p>
			<p>"All this time I've been pouring my heart out to you and you've been wearing that <i>machine's</i> face! You don't even have the decency to show me your goddamned <i>eyes</i>!"</p>
			<p>Clarke steps back, startled. Ballard rises from the bed and takes a single step forward. "To think you could actually pass for human before they gave you that suit! Why don't you go find something to play with out in your fucking ocean!"</p>
			<p>And slams the hatch in Clarke's face.</p>
			<p>Lenie Clarke stares at the sealed bulkhead for a few moments. Her face, she knows, is calm. Her face is usually calm. But she stands there, unmoving, until the cringing thing inside of her unfolds a little.</p>
			<p>"Okay," she says at last, very softly. "I guess I will."</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>Ballard is waiting for her as she emerges from the airlock. "Lenie," she says quietly, "we have to talk. It's important."</p>
			<p>Clarke bends over and removes her fins. "Go ahead."</p>
			<p>"Not here. In my cubby."</p>
			<p>Clarke looks at her.</p>
			<p>"Please."</p>
			<p>Clarke starts up the ladder.</p>
			<p>"Aren't you going to take—" Ballard stops as Clarke looks down. "Never mind. It's okay."</p>
			<p>They ascend into the lounge. Ballard takes the lead. Clarke follows her down the corridor and into her cabin. Ballard dogs the hatch and sits on her bunk, leaving room for Clarke.</p>
			<p>Clarke looks around the cramped space. Ballard has curtained over the mirrored bulkhead with a spare sheet.</p>
			<p>Ballard pats the bed beside her. "Come on, Lenie. Sit down."</p>
			<p>Reluctantly, Clarke sits. Ballard's sudden kindness confuses her. Ballard hasn't acted this way since...</p>
			<p><i>...Since she had the upper hand.</i></p>
			<p>"—might not be easy for you to hear," Ballard is saying, "but we have to get you off the rift. They shouldn't have put you down here in the first place."</p>
			<p>Clarke doesn't reply.</p>
			<p>"Remember the tests they gave us?" Ballard continues. "They measured our tolerance to stress; confinement, prolonged isolation, chronic physical danger, that sort of thing."</p>
			<p>Clarke nods slightly. "So?"</p>
			<p>"So," says Ballard, "Did you think for a moment they'd test for those qualities without knowing what sort of person would have them? Or how they got to be that way?"</p>
			<p>Inside, Clarke goes very still. Outside, nothing changes.</p>
			<p>Ballard leans forward a bit. "Remember what you said? About mountain climbers, and free-fallers, and why people deliberately do dangerous things? I've been reading up, Lenie. Ever since I got to know you I've been reading up—"</p>
			<p><i>Got to know me?</i></p>
			<p>"—and do you know what thrillseekers have in common? They all say that you haven't lived until you've nearly died. They need the danger. It gives them a rush."</p>
			<p><i>You don't know me at all—</i></p>
			<p>"Some of them are combat veterans, some were hostages for long periods, some just spent a lot of time in dead zones for one reason or another. And a lot of the really compulsive ones—"</p>
			<p><i>Nobody knows me.</i></p>
			<p>"—the ones who can't be happy unless they're on the edge, all the time — a lot of them got started early, Lenie. When they were just children. And you, I bet— you don't even like being touched—"</p>
			<p><i>Go away.</i> <i>Go away.</i></p>
			<p>Ballard puts her hand on Clarke's shoulder. "How long were you abused, Lenie?" she asks gently. "How many years?"</p>
			<p>Clarke shrugs off the hand and does not answer. <i>He didn't mean any harm.</i> She shifts on the bunk, turning away slightly.</p>
			<p>"That's it, isn't it? You don't just have a tolerance to trauma, Lenie. You've got an <i>addiction</i> to it. Don't you?"</p>
			<p>It only takes Clarke a moment to recover. The 'skin, the eyecaps make it easier. She turns calmly back to Ballard. She even smiles a little.</p>
			<p>"<i>Abused</i>," she says. "Now <i>there's</i> a quaint term. Thought it died out after the witch-hunts. You some sort of history buff, Jeanette?"</p>
			<p>"There's a mechanism," Ballard tells her. "I've been reading about it. Do you know how the brain handles stress, Lenie? It dumps all sorts of addictive stimulants into the bloodstream. Beta-endorphins, opioids. If it happens often enough, for long enough, you get hooked. You can't help it."</p>
			<p>Clarke feels a sound in her throat, a jagged coughing noise a bit like tearing metal. After a moment, she recognizes it as laughter.</p>
			<p>"I'm not making it up!" Ballard insists. "You can look it up yourself if you don't believe me! Don't you know how many abused children spend their whole lives hooked on wife beaters or self-mutilation or free-fall—"</p>
			<p>"And it makes them happy, is that it?" Clarke says, still smiling. "They <i>enjoy</i> getting raped, or punched out, or—"</p>
			<p>"No, of course you're not happy! But what <i>you</i> feel, that's probably the closest you've ever come. So you confuse the two, you look for stress anywhere you can find it. It's physiological addiction, Lenie. You ask for it. You always asked for it."</p>
			<p><i>I ask for it.</i> Ballard's been reading, and Ballard knows: Life is pure electrochemistry. No use explaining how it <i>feels.</i> No use explaining that there are far worse things than being beaten up. There are even worse things than being held down and raped by your own father. There are the times between, when nothing happens at all. When he leaves you alone, and you don't know for how long. You sit across the table from him, forcing yourself to eat while your bruised insides try to knit themselves back together; and he pats you on the head and smiles at you, and you know the reprieve's already lasted too long, he's going to come for you tonight, or tomorrow, or maybe the next day.</p>
			<p><i>Of course I asked for it.</i> <i>How else could I get it over with?</i></p>
			<p>"Listen." Clarke shakes her head. "I—" But it's hard to talk, suddenly. She knows what she wants to say; Ballard's not the only one who reads. Ballard can't see it through a lifetime of fulfilled expectations, but there's nothing special about what happened to Lenie Clarke. Baboons and lions kill their own young. Male sticklebacks beat up their mates. Even <i>insects </i>rape. It's not abuse, really, it's just— biology.</p>
			<p>But she can't say it aloud, for some reason. She tries, and she tries, but in the end all that comes out is a challenge that sounds almost childish:</p>
			<p>"Don't you know <i>anything</i>?"</p>
			<p>"Sure I do, Lenie. I know you're hooked on your own pain, and so you go out there and keep daring the rift to kill you, and eventually it will, don't you see? That's why you shouldn't be here. That's why we have to get you back."</p>
			<p>Clarke stands up. "I'm not going back." She turns to the hatch.</p>
			<p>Ballard reaches out toward her. "Listen, you've got to stay and hear me out. There's more."</p>
			<p>Clarke looks down at her with complete indifference. "Thanks for your concern. But I don't have to stay. I can leave any time I want to."</p>
			<p>"You go out there now and you'll give everything away, they're watching us! Haven't you figured it out <i>yet</i>?" Ballard's voice is rising. "Listen, they <i>knew</i> about you! They were <i>looking</i> for someone like you! They've been testing us, they don't know yet what kind of person works out better down here, so they're watching and waiting to see who cracks first! This whole program is still experimental, can't you see that? Everyone they've sent down — you, me, Ken Lubin and Lana Cheung, it's all part of some cold-blooded test—"</p>
			<p>"And you're failing it," Clarke says softly. "I see."</p>
			<p>"They're <i>using</i> us, Lenie—<i>don't go out there!</i>"</p>
			<p>Ballard's fingers grasp at Clarke like the suckers of an octopus. Clarke pushes them away. She undogs the hatch and pushes it open. She hears Ballard rising behind her.</p>
			<p>"<i>You're sick!</i>" Ballard screams. Something smashes into the back of Clarke's head. She goes sprawling out into the corridor. One arm smacks painfully against a cluster of pipes as she falls.</p>
			<p>She rolls to one side and raises her arms to protect herself. But Ballard just steps over her and stalks into the lounge.</p>
			<p><i>I'm not afraid,</i> Clarke notes, getting to her feet. <i>She hit me, and I'm not afraid.</i> <i>Isn't that odd—</i></p>
			<p>From somewhere nearby, the sound of shattering glass.</p>
			<p>Ballard's shouting in the lounge. "The experiment's over! Come on out, you fucking ghouls!"</p>
			<p>Clarke follows the corridor, steps out of it. Pieces of the lounge mirror hang like great jagged stalactites in their frame. Splashes of glass litter the floor.</p>
			<p>On the wall, behind the broken mirror, a fisheye lens takes in every corner of the room.</p>
			<p>Ballard is staring into it. "Did you hear me? I'm not playing your stupid games any more! I'm through performing!"</p>
			<p>The quartzite lens stares back impassively.</p>
			<p><i>So you were right</i>, Clarke muses. She remembers the sheet in Ballard's cubby. <i>You figured it out, you found the pickups in your own cubby, and Ballard, my dear friend, you didn't tell me.</i></p>
			<p><i>How long have you known?</i></p>
			<p>Ballard looks around, sees Clarke. "You've got <i>her</i> fooled, all right," she snarls at the fisheye, "but <i>she's</i> a goddamned basket case! She's not even sane! Your little tests don't impress <i>me</i> one fucking bit!"</p>
			<p>Clarke steps toward her.</p>
			<p>"Don't call me a basket case," she says, her voice absolutely level.</p>
			<p>"That's what you <i>are</i>!" Ballard shouts. "You're sick! That's why you're down here! They <i>need</i> you sick, they depend on it, and you're so far gone you can't see it! You hide everything behind that — that <i>mask</i> of yours, and you sit there like some masochistic jellyfish and just take anything anyone dishes out—you <i>ask</i> for it—"</p>
			<p><i>That used to be true</i>, Clarke realizes as her hands ball into fists. <i>That's the strange thing.</i> Ballard begins to back away; Clarke advances, step by step. <i>It wasn't until I came down here that I learned that I could fight back</i>. <i>That I could win</i>. <i>The rift taught me that, and now Ballard has too—</i></p>
			<p>"Thank you," Clarke whispers, and hits Ballard hard in the face.</p>
			<p>Ballard goes over backwards, collides with a table. Clarke calmly steps forward. She catches a glimpse of herself in a glass icicle; her capped eyes seem almost luminous.</p>
			<p>"Oh Jesus," Ballard whimpers. "Lenie, I'm <i>sorry</i>."</p>
			<p>Clarke stands over her. "Don't be," she says. She sees herself as some sort of exploding schematic, each piece neatly labeled. <i>So much anger in here</i>, she thinks. <i>So much hate</i>. <i>So much to take out on someone.</i></p>
			<p>She looks at Ballard, cowering on the floor.</p>
			<p>"I think," Clarke says, "I'll start with you."</p>
			<p>But her therapy ends before she can even get properly warmed up. A sudden noise fills the lounge, shrill, periodic, vaguely familiar. It takes a moment for Clarke to remember what it is. She lowers her foot.</p>
			<p>Over in the Communications cubby, the telephone is ringing.</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>Jeanette Ballard is going home today.</p>
			<p>For half an hour the 'scaphe has been dropping deeper into midnight. Now the Comm monitor shows it settling like a great bloated tadpole onto Beebe's docking assembly. Sounds of mechanical copulation reverberate and die. The overhead hatch drops open.</p>
			<p>Ballard's replacement climbs down, already mostly 'skinned, staring impenetrably from eyes without pupils. His gloves are off; his 'skin is open up to the forearms. Clarke sees the faint scars running along his wrists, and smiles a bit inside.</p>
			<p><i>Was there another Ballard up there, waiting</i>, she wonders, <i>in case I had been the one who didn't work out?</i></p>
			<p>Out of sight down the corridor, a hatch hisses open. Ballard appears in shirtsleeves, one eye swollen shut, carrying a single suitcase. She seems about to say something, but stops when she sees the newcomer. She looks at him for a moment. She nods briefly. She climbs into the belly of the 'scaphe without a word.</p>
			<p>Nobody calls down to them. There are no salutations, no morale-boosting small talk. Perhaps the crew have been briefed. Perhaps they've figured it out on their own. The docking hatch swings shut. With a final clank, the 'scaphe disengages.</p>
			<p>Clarke walks across the lounge and looks into the camera. She reaches between mirror fragments and rips its power line from the wall.</p>
			<p><i>We don't need this any more</i>, she thinks, and she knows that somewhere far away, someone agrees.</p>
			<p>She and the newcomer appraise each other with dead white eyes.</p>
			<p>"I'm Lubin," he says at last.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
