<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Elevator Boy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1-2" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Elevator Boy</h4>
			<p>The Pacific Ocean slopped two kilometers under his feet. He had a cargo of blank-eyed psychotics sitting behind him. And the lifter was being piloted by a large pizza with extra cheese. Joel Kita liked it all about as much as could be expected.</p>
			<p>At least he <i>had</i> been expecting it, this time. For once the GA hadn't sprung one of their exercises in chaos theory onto his life without warning. He'd seen it coming almost a week in advance, when they'd sprung one onto Ray Stericker instead. Ray had been in this very cockpit, watching the pizza being installed and no doubt wondering when the term "job security" had become an oxymoron.</p>
			<p>"I'm supposed to baby-sit it for a week," he had said then. Joel had climbed up into the 'scaphe for the usual preflight check and found his friend waiting by the controls. Ray had gestured up through the open hatchway to the lifter's cockpit, where a couple of techs were busy interfacing something to the controls. "Just in case it screws up in the field. Then I'm gone."</p>
			<p>"Gone where?" Joel couldn't believe it. Ray had been on the Juan de Fuca run forever, even before the geothermal program. He’d even been an <i>employee</i>, back when such things were commonplace.</p>
			<p>"Probably the Gorda circuit for a while. After that, who knows? They'll be upgrading everything before long."</p>
			<p>Joel glanced up through the hatch. The techs were playing with a square vanilla box, half a meter on a side and about twice as thick as Kita's wrist. "What <i>is</i> the fucking thing? Some kind of autopilot?"</p>
			<p>"With a difference. This takes off and lands. And all sorts of lovely things in between."</p>
			<p>This was not good news. Humans had always been able to integrate three-D spatial information better than the machines that kept trying to replace them. Not that machines couldn't recognize a tree or a building when such objects were pointed out to them, but they got real confused whenever you rotated any of those objects a few degrees. The shapes changed, contrast and shadow shifted, and it always took way too long for any of those arsenide pretenders to update its spatial maps and recognize that yes, it's still a tree, and no, it didn't morph into something else, dummy, you just changed your point of view.</p>
			<p>In some places that wasn't a problem. Ocean surfaces, for example. Or controlled-access highways where the cars had their own ID transponders. Or even lashed to the underside of a giant squashed doughnut filled with buoyant vacuum, floating in mid-air. These had been respected and venerable environments for autopilots since well before the turn of the century.</p>
			<p>Take-offs and landings were a different scene altogether, though. Too many real objects going by too fast, too many things to keep an eye on. A few billion years of natural selection still had the edge when the fast lane got that crowded.</p>
			<p>Until now, apparently.</p>
			<p>"Let's get out of here." Ray dropped down onto the landing pad. Joel followed him out to the edge of the roof. Green tangled blankets of kudzu<sub>4</sub> spread out around them, shrouding the roofs of surrounding buildings. It always made Joel think post-apocalypse — weeds and ivy crawling back in from the wilderness to strangle the residue of some fallen civilization. Except, of course, these particular weeds were supposed to <i>save</i> civilization.</p>
			<p>Way out by the coast, barely visible, streamers of smoke dribbled into the sky from the refugee strip. <i>So much for civilization.</i></p>
			<p>"It's one of those smart gels," Ray said at last.</p>
			<p>"Smart gels?"</p>
			<p>"Head cheese. Cultured brain cells on a slab. The same things they've been plugging into the Net to firewall infections."</p>
			<p>"I know what they are, Ray. I just can't fucking believe it."</p>
			<p>"Well, believe it. They'll be coming for you too, give 'em enough time."</p>
			<p>"Yeah. Probably." Joel let it sink in. "I wonder when."</p>
			<p>Ray shrugged. "You've got some breathing space. All that unpredictable volcanic shit, things blowing up under you. Nastier than flying a hoover. Harder to replace you."</p>
			<p>He looked back at the lifter, and the 'scaphe nestled into its underbelly.</p>
			<p>"Won't take long, though."</p>
			<p>Joel fished a derm out of his pocket; a tricyclic with a mild lithium chaser. He held it out without a word.</p>
			<p>Ray just spat. "Thanks anyway. I <i>want</i> to feel pissed for a while, you know?"</p>
			<p>* * *</p>
			<p>And now, eight days later, Ray Stericker was gone.</p>
			<p>He'd disappeared after his last shift, just the day before. Joel had tried to track him down, drag him out, piss him up, but he hadn't been able to find the man on site and Ray wasn't answering his watch. So here was Joel Kita, back on the job, alone except for his cargo; four very strange people in black suits, blank white lenses covering their eyes. They all had identical GA logos stamped onto their shoulders, tags with their surnames printed just below. At least the surnames were different, although the difference seemed trivial; male, female, large or small, they all seemed minor variants of the same make and model. <i>Ah yes, the Mk-5 was always such a nice boy. Kind of quiet, kept to himself. Who would've thought...</i></p>
			<p>Joel had seen rifters before. He'd ferried a couple out to Beebe about a month ago, just after construction had ended. One of them had seemed almost normal, had gone out of her way to chat and joke around as if trying to compensate for the fact that she looked like a zombie. Joel had forgotten her name.</p>
			<p>The other one hadn't said a word.</p>
			<p>One of the 'scaphe's tactical screens beeped a progress report. "Bottom's rising again," Joel called back. "Thirty five hundred. We're almost there."</p>
			<p>"Thanks," one of them — <i>Fischer</i>, according to his shoulder tag — said. Everyone else just sat there.</p>
			<p>A pressure hatch separated the 'scaphe's cockpit from the passenger compartment. If you sealed it you could use the aft chamber as an airlock, or even pressurize it for saturation dives if you didn't mind the hassle of decompression. You could also just swing the hatch shut if you wanted a bit of privacy, if you didn't like leaving your back exposed to certain passengers. That would be bad manners, of course. Joel tried idly to think of some socially acceptable excuse for slamming that big metal disk in their faces, but gave up after a few moments.</p>
			<p>Now, the dorsal hatch — the one leading up into the lifter's cockpit — that one <i>was</i> closed, and that felt wrong. Usually they kept it open until just before the drop. Ray and Joel would shoot the shit for however long the trip would take — three hours, if you were going to Channer.</p>
			<p>Yesterday, without warning, Ray Stericker had dropped the hatch shut fifteen minutes into the flight. He hadn't said an unnecessary word the whole time, had barely even used the intercom. And today — well, today there wasn't anyone up there to talk to any more.</p>
			<p>Joel looked out one of the side ports. The skin of the lifter blocked his view just a few centimeters on the other side; metal fabric stretched across carbon-fiber ribs, a gray expanse sucked into concave squares by the hard vacuum inside. The 'scaphe rode tucked into an oval hollow in the lifter's center. The only port that showed anything but gray skin was the one between Joel's feet; ocean, a long way down.</p>
			<p>Not so far down now, though. He could hear the hisses and sighs of the lifter's ballast bags deflating overhead. Sharper sounds, more distant, cracked through the hull as electrical arcs heated the air in a couple of trim bags. This was still regular autopilot territory, but Ray used to do it all himself anyway. If it weren't for the closed hatch, Joel couldn't have told the difference.</p>
			<p>The head cheese was doing a bang-up job.</p>
			<p>He'd actually seen it a few days ago, during a delivery to an undersea rig just out of Gray's Harbor. Ray had hit a stud and the top of the box had slid away like white mercury, slipping back into a little groove at the edge of the casing and revealing a transparent panel underneath.</p>
			<p>Beneath that panel, packed in clear fluid, was a ridged layer of goo, a bit too gray to be mozzarella. Dashes of brownish glass perforated the goo in neat parallel rows.</p>
			<p>"I'm not supposed to open it up like this," Ray had said. "But fuck 'em. It's not as though the blighter's photosensitive."</p>
			<p>"So what are those little brown bits?"</p>
			<p>"Indium tin oxide over glass. Semiconductor."</p>
			<p>"Jesus. And it's working right now?"</p>
			<p>"Even as we speak."</p>
			<p>"Jesus," Joel had said again. And then: "I wonder how you program something like this."</p>
			<p>Ray had snorted at that. "You don't. You <i>teach</i> it. Learns through positive reinforcement, like a bloody baby."</p>
			<p>A sudden, smooth shift in momentum. Joel pulled back to the present; the lifter was hanging stable, five meters over the waves. Right on target. Nothing but empty ocean on the surface, of course; Beebe's transponder was thirty meters straight down. Shallow enough to home in on, too deep to be a navigational hazard. Or to serve as a midwater hitching post for charter boats hunting Channer's legendary sea monsters.</p>
			<p>The cheese printed out a word on the 'scaphe's tactical board: <i>Launch?</i></p>
			<p>Joel's finger wavered over the OK key, then came down. Docking latches clanked open; the lifter reeled Joel Kita and his cargo down to the water. Sunlight squinted through viewports for a few seconds as the 'scaphe swung in its harness. A wavetop batted at the forward port.</p>
			<p>The world jerked once, slewed sideways, and turned green.</p>
			<p>Joel opened the ballast tanks and looked back over his shoulder. "Going down, folks. Your last glimpse of sunlight. Enjoy it while you can."</p>
			<p>"Thanks," said <i>Fischer</i>.</p>
			<p>Nobody else moved.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
