<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Jumpstart</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-1" id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Jumpstart</h4>
			<p>He dreamed of water.</p>
			<p>He always dreamed of water. He dreamed the smell of dead fish in rotten nets, and rainbow puddles of gasoline shimmering off the Steveston jetty, and a home so close to the shoreline you could barely get insurance. He dreamed of a time when waterfront meant something, even the muddy brown stretch where the Fraser hemorrhaged into the Strait of Georgia. His mother was standing over him, beaming <i>a vital ecological resource, Yves. A staging ground for migrating birds. A filter for the whole world.</i> And little Yves Scanlon smiled back, proud that he alone of all his friends⁠—well, not <i>friends</i> exactly, but maybe they would be <i>now</i>⁠—would grow up appreciating nature firsthand, right here in his new back yard. One and a half meters above the high-tide line.</p>
			<p>And then, as usual, the real world kicked in the doors and electrocuted his mother in mid-smile.</p>
			<p>Sometimes he could postpone the inevitable. Sometimes he could fight the jolt from his bedside dreamer, keep it from dragging him back for just a few more seconds. Thirty years of random images would flash across his mind in those moments; falling forests, bloating deserts, ultraviolet fingers reaching ever deeper into barren seas. Oceans creeping up shorelines. Vital ecological resources turning into squatting camps for refugees. Squatting camps turning into intertidal zones.</p>
			<p>And Yves Scanlon was awake again, sweat-soaked, teeth clenched, jump-started.</p>
			<p><i>God,</i> <i>no</i>. <i>I’m</i> <i>back</i>.</p>
			<p>The real world.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Three and a half hours. Only three and a half hours⁠ ⁠…</i>
			</p>
			<p>It was all the dreamer would allow him. Sleep stages one through four got ten minutes each. REM got thirty, in deference to the incompressibility of the dream state. A seventy-minute cycle, run three times nightly.</p>
			<p>
				<i>You could freelance. Everyone else does.</i>
			</p>
			<p>Freelancers chose their own hours. Employees⁠—those few that remained⁠—got their hours chosen for them. Yves Scanlon was an employee. He frequently reminded himself of the advantages: you didn’t have to fight and scramble for a new contract every six months. You had stability, of a sort. If you performed. If you kept on performing. Which meant, of course, that Yves Scanlon couldn’t afford the nightly nine-and-a-half-hours that was optimal for his species.</p>
			<p>Servitude for security, then. No day passed when he didn’t hate the choice he’d made. Some day, perhaps, he’d even hate it more than he feared the alternative.</p>
			<p>“Seventeen items on high priority,” said the workstation as his feet hit the floor. “Four broadcast, twelve net, one phone. Broadcast and phone items are clean. Net items were disinfected on entry, with a forty percent chance that encrypted bugs slipped through.”</p>
			<p>“Up the disinfectant,” Scanlon said.</p>
			<p>“That will destroy any encrypted bugs, but might also destroy up to five percent of the legitimate data. I could just dump the risky files.”</p>
			<p>“Disinfect them. What’s on midlist?”</p>
			<p>“Eight hundred and sixty three items. Three hundred twenty seven broad⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Dump it all.” Scanlon headed for the bathroom, stopped. “Wait a minute. Play the phone call.”</p>
			<p>“This is Patricia Rowan,” the station said in a cold, clipped voice. “We may be encountering some personnel problems with the deep-sea geothermal program. I’d like to discuss them with you. I’ll have your return call routed direct.”</p>
			<p><i>Shit.</i> Rowan was one of the top corpses on the west coast. She’d barely even acknowledged him since he’d been hired on at the GA. “Is there a priority on that call?” Scanlon asked.</p>
			<p>“Important but not urgent,” the workstation replied.</p>
			<p>He could have breakfast first, maybe go through his mail. He could ignore all those reflexes urging him to drop everything and jump like a trained seal to immediate attention. They needed him for something. About time. About goddamned time.</p>
			<p>“I’m taking a shower,” he told the workstation, hesitantly defiant. “Don’t bother me until I come out.”</p>
			<p>His reflexes, though, didn’t like it at all.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“⁠—that ‘curing’ victims of multiple personality disorder is actually tantamount to serial murder. The issue has remained controversial in the wake of recent findings that the human brain can potentially contain up to one hundred forty fully-sentient personalities without significant sensory/motor impairment. The tribunal will also consider whether encouraging a multiple personality to reintegrate voluntarily⁠—again, a traditionally therapeutic act⁠—should be redefined as assisted suicide. Crosslinked to next item under cognition and legal.”</p>
			<p>The workstation fell silent.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Rowan wants to see me. The VP in charge of the GA’s whole Northwest franchise wants to see me. Me.</i>
			</p>
			<p>He was thinking into sudden silence. Scanlon realised the workstation had stopped talking. “Next,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Fundamentalist acquitted of murder in the destruction of a smart gel,” the station recited. “Tagged to⁠—”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Didn’t she say I’d be working with her, though? Wasn’t that the deal when I first came on?</i>
			</p>
			<p>“⁠—AI, cognition, and legal.”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Yeah. That’s what they said. Ten years ago.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Ahh⁠—summary, nontechnical,” Scanlon told the machine.</p>
			<p>“Victim was a smart gel on temporary loan to the Ontario Science Center as part of a public exhibit on artificial intelligence. Accused admitted to the act, stating that neuron cultures”⁠—the workstation changed voices, neatly inserting a sound bite⁠—“<i>desecrate the human soul.</i></p>
			<p>“Expert defense witnesses, including a smart gel online from Rutgers, testified that neuron cultures lack the primitive midbrain structures necessary to experience pain, fear, or a desire for self-preservation. Defense argued that the concept of a ‘right’ is intended to protect individuals from unwarranted suffering. Since smart gels are incapable of physical or mental distress of any sort, they have no rights to protect regardless of their level of self-awareness. This reasoning was eloquently summarized during the Defense’s closing statement: ‘Gels themselves don’t care whether they live or die. Why should we?’ The verdict is under appeal. Crosslinked to next item under AI and World News.”</p>
			<p>Scanlon swallowed a mouthful of powdered albumin. “List expert defense witnesses, names only.”</p>
			<p>“Phillip Quan. Lily Kozlowski. David Childs⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Stop.” Lily Kozlowski. He knew her, from back at UCLA. An expert witness. Shit. <i>Maybe</i> I <i>should have kissed a few more asses in grad school⁠ ⁠…</i></p>
			<p>Scanlon snorted. “Next.”</p>
			<p>“Net infections down fifteen percent.”</p>
			<p><i>Problems with the Rifters, she said. I wonder⁠ ⁠…</i>“Summary, nontechnical.”</p>
			<p>“Viral infections on the Internet have declined fifteen percent in the past six months, due to the ongoing installation of smart gels at critical nodes along the net’s backbone. Digital infections find it nearly impossible to infect smart gels, each of which has a unique and flexible system architecture. In light of these most recent results, some experts are predicting a safe return to casual email by the end of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah, fuck. Cancel.”</p>
			<p>
				<i>Come on, Yves. You’ve been waiting for years for those idiots to recognise your abilities. Maybe this is it. Don’t blow it by looking too eager.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Waiting,” said the station.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Only what if she doesn’t wait? What if she gets impatient and goes for someone else? What if⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Tag the last phone call and reply.” Scanlon stared at the dregs of his breakfast while the connection went up.</p>
			<p>“Admin,” said a voice that sounded real.</p>
			<p>“Yves Scanlon for Patricia Rowan.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rowan is occupied. Her simulator is expecting your call. This conversation is being monitored for quality control purposes.” A click, and another voice that sounded real: “Hello, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Scanlon.”</p>
			<p>His Master’s voice.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
