<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Turncoat</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-3" id="chapter-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Turncoat</h4>
			<p>She'd told the truth about the döppelgangers. She'd lied about everything else.</p>
			<p>After four days Scanlon left a message in Rowan's cache. Two days later he left another. In the meantime he waited for the spirit which had thrust its finger up its ass to come back and tell him more about primordial biochemistry. It never did. By now even the other ghosts weren't visiting very often, and they barely said a word when they did.</p>
			<p>Rowan didn't return Scanlon's calls. Patience melted into uncertainty. Uncertainty simmered into conviction. Conviction began to gently boil.</p>
			<p><i>Locked up in here for three fucking weeks and all she gives me is a ten-minute courtesy call. Ten lousy minutes of my-experts-say-you're-wrong and it's-such-a-basic-point-I-can't-believe-you-missed-it and then she just walks away. She just fucking smiles and walks away. </i></p>
			<p>"Know what I <i>should</i> have done," he growled at the teleop. It was the middle of the day but he didn't care any more. Nobody was listening, they'd deserted him in here. They'd probably forgotten all about him. "What I <i>should</i> have done is rip a hole in that fucking membrane when she was here. Let a little of whatever's in <i>here</i> out to mix with the air in <i>her </i>lungs. Bet <i>that'd</i> inspire her to look for some answers!"</p>
			<p>He knew it was fantasy. The membrane was almost infinitely flexible, and just as tough. Even if he succeeded in cutting it, it would repair itself before any mere gas molecules could jump through. Still, it was satisfying to think about.</p>
			<p>Not satisfying enough. Scanlon picked up a chair and hurled it at the window. The membrane caught it like a form-fitting glove, enfolded it, let it fall almost to the floor on the other side. Then, slowly, the window tightened down to two dimensions. The chair toppled back into Scanlon's cell, completely undamaged.</p>
			<p>And to think she'd had the fucking <i>temerity </i>to lecture him with that inane little homily about house arrest! As though she'd caught him in some sort of <i>lie</i>, when he'd suggested the vampires might stay put. As though she thought he was <i>covering</i> for them.</p>
			<p>Sure, he knew more about vampires than anyone. That didn't mean he <i>was</i> one. That didn't mean—</p>
			<p><i>We could have treated you better</i>, Lubin had said, there at the last. <i>We</i>. As though he'd been speaking for all of them. As though, finally, they were <i>accepting</i> him. As though—</p>
			<p>But vampires were damaged goods, always had been. That was the whole point. How could Yves Scanlon qualify for membership in a club like <i>that</i>?</p>
			<p>He knew one thing, though. He'd rather be a vampire than one of these assholes up <i>here</i>. That was obvious now. Now that the pretenses were dropping away and they didn't even bother talking to him any more. They exploited him and then they shunned him, they used him just like they used the vampires. He'd always known that deep down, of course. But he'd tried to deny it, kept it stifled under years of accommodation and good intentions and misguided efforts to fit in.</p>
			<p>These people were the enemy. They'd always been the enemy.</p>
			<p>And they had him by the balls.</p>
			<p>He spun around and slammed his fist into the examination table. It didn't even hurt. He continued until it did. Panting, knuckles raw and stinging, he looked around for something else to smash.</p>
			<p>The teleop woke up enough to hiss and spark when the chair bounced off its central trunk. One of the arms wiggled spastically for a moment. A faint smell of burnt insulation. Then nothing. Only slightly dented, the teleop slept on above a litter of broken paradigms.</p>
			<p>"Tip for the day," Scanlon snarled at it. "Never trust a dryback."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
