<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Sunrise</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-5" id="chapter-2-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Sunrise</h4>
			<p>The lifter was still reeling CSS <i>Forcipiger</i> up into its belly when the news appeared on the main display. Joel checked it over, frowning, then deliberately looked outside. Gray predawn light was starting to wash out the eastern horizon.</p>
			<p>When he looked back again, the information hadn’t changed. “Shit. This doesn’t make any sense at all.”</p>
			<p>“What?” Clarke said.</p>
			<p>“We’re not going back to Astoria. Or I am, but you’re getting dropped off over the conshelf somewhere.”</p>
			<p>“<i>What?</i>” Clarke came forward, stopped just short of the cockpit.</p>
			<p>“Says right here. We follow the usual course, but we dip down to zero altitude fifteen klicks offshore. You debark. Then I go on to Astoria.”</p>
			<p>“What’s offshore?”</p>
			<p>He checked. “Nothing. Water.”</p>
			<p>“Maybe a boat? A submarine?” Her voice went oddly dull on the last word.</p>
			<p>“Maybe. No mention of it here, though.” He grunted. “Maybe you’re supposed to swim the rest of the way.”</p>
			<p>The lifter locked them tight. Tame thunderbolts exploded aft, superheating bladders of gas. The ocean began to fall away.</p>
			<p>“So you’re just going to dump me in the middle of the ocean,” Clarke said coldly.</p>
			<p>“It’s not my decision.”</p>
			<p>“Of course not. You’re just following orders.”</p>
			<p>Joel turned around. Her eyes stared back at him like twin snowscapes.</p>
			<p>“You don’t understand,” he told her. “These aren’t <i>orders</i>. I don’t fly the lifter.”</p>
			<p>“Then what⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The pilot’s a gel. It’s not telling <i>me</i> to do anything. It’s just bringing us up to speed on what <i>it’s</i> doing, all on its own.”</p>
			<p>She didn’t say anything for a moment. Then, “Is that the way it’s done now? We take orders from machines?”</p>
			<p>“Someone must have given the original order. The gel’s following it. They haven’t taken over yet. And besides,” he added, “they’re not exactly machines.”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” she said softly. “I feel much better now.”</p>
			<p>Uncomfortably, Joel turned back to the console. “It is kind of odd, though.”</p>
			<p>“Really.” Clarke didn’t seem especially interested.</p>
			<p>“Getting this from the gel, I mean. We’ve got a radio link. Why didn’t someone just <i>tell</i> us?”</p>
			<p>“Because your radio’s out,” Clarke said distantly.</p>
			<p>Surprised, he checked the diagnostics. “No, it’s working fine. In fact, I think I’ll call in right now and ask what the fuck this is all about⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Thirty seconds later he turned back to her. “How did you know?”</p>
			<p>“Lucky guess.” She didn’t smile.</p>
			<p>“Well the board’s green, but I can’t raise anyone. We’re flying deaf.” A doubt tickled the back of his mind. “Unless the gel’s got access we don’t, for some reason.” He linked into the lifter’s interface and called up that vehicle’s afferent array. “Huh. What was that you said about machines giving the orders?”</p>
			<p>That got her attention. “What is it?”</p>
			<p>“The lifter got its orders through the Net.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t that risky? Why doesn’t the GA just talk to it direct?”</p>
			<p>“Dunno. It’s as cut off as we are right now, but the last message came from this node here. Shit; that’s another gel.”</p>
			<p>Clarke leaned forward, managing somehow not to touch him in the crowded space. “How can you tell?”</p>
			<p>“The node address. BCC stands for biochemical cognition.”</p>
			<p>The display beeped twice, loudly.</p>
			<p>“What’s that?” Clarke said.</p>
			<p>Sunlight flooded up from the ocean. It shone deep and violent blue.</p>
			<p>“What the <i>fuck⁠—</i>”</p>
			<p>The cabin filled with computer screams. The altimeter readout flashed crimson and plummeted. <i>We’re falling</i>, Joel thought, and then, <i>no, we can’t be. No acceleration.</i></p>
			<p><i>The ocean’s</i> rising⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The display was a blizzard of data, swirling by too fast for human eyes. Somewhere overhead the gel was furiously processing options that might keep them alive. A sudden lurch: Joel grabbed useless submarine controls and hung on for dear life. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Clarke flying back towards the rear bulkhead.</p>
			<p>The lifter clawed itself into the sky, lightning crackling along its length. The ocean raced after it, an enormous glowing bulge swelling towards the ventral port. Its murky light brightened as Joel watched; blue intensifying to green, to yellow.</p>
			<p>To white.</p>
			<p>A hole opened in the Pacific. The sun rose in its center. Joel flung his hands in front of his eyes, saw the bones there silhouetted in orange flesh. The lifter spun like a kicked toy, rammed deep into the sky on a pillar of steam. Outside, the air screamed. The lifter screamed back, skidding.</p>
			<p>But it didn’t break.</p>
			<p>Somehow, after endless seconds, the keel steadied. The readouts were still online; <i>atmospheric disturbance</i>, they said, almost eight kilometers away now, bearing one-twenty. Joel looked out the starboard port. Off in the distance, the glowing ocean was ponderously collapsing upon itself. Ring-shaped waves expanded past beneath his feet, racing to the horizon.</p>
			<p>Back where they had started, cumulus grew into the sky like a soft gray beanstalk. From here, against the darkness, it looked almost peaceful.</p>
			<p>“Clarke,” he said, “we made it.”</p>
			<p>He turned in his chair. The rifter was curled into a fetal position against the bulkhead. She didn’t move.</p>
			<p>“Clarke?”</p>
			<p>But it wasn’t Clarke that answered him. The lifter’s interface was bleating again.</p>
			<p><i>Unregistered contact</i>, it complained.</p>
			<p>
				<i>Bearing 125x87 V1440 6V5.8m1sec<sup>−2</sup> range 13000m</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>Collision imminent 12000m</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>11000m</i>
			</p>
			<p>
				<i>10000m</i>
			</p>
			<p>Barely visible through the main viewport, a white cloudy dot caught a high-altitude shaft of morning sunlight. It looked like a contrail, seen head-on.</p>
			<p>“Ah, shit,” Joel said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
