<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Reptile</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-2-5" id="chapter-2-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="title">Reptile</h4>
			<p>It has forgotten what it was.</p>
			<p>Not that that matters, down here. What good is a name when there’s nothing around to use it? This one doesn’t remember where it comes from. It doesn’t remember the ones that drove it out so long ago. It doesn’t remember the overlord that once sat atop its spinal cord, that gelatinous veneer of language and culture and denied origins. It doesn’t even remember the slow deterioration of that oppressor, its final dissolution into dozens of autonomous, squabbling subroutines. Now even those have fallen silent.</p>
			<p>Not much comes down from the cortex any more. Low-level impulses flicker in from the parietal and occipital lobes. The motor strip hums in the background. Occasionally, Broca’s area mutters to itself. The rest is mostly dead and dark, worn smooth by a black ocean hot and mercurial as live steam, cold and sluggish as antifreeze. All that’s left now is pure reptile.</p>
			<p>It pushes on, blind and unthinking, oblivious to the weight of four hundred liquid atmospheres. It eats whatever it can find, somehow knowing what to avoid and what to consume. Desalinators and recyclers keep it hydrated. Sometimes, old mammalian skin grows sticky with secreted residues; newer skin, laid on top, opens pores to the ocean and washes everything clean with aliquots of distilled sea water.</p>
			<p>It’s dying, of course, but slowly. It wouldn’t care much about that, even if it knew.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Like all living things, it has a purpose. It is a guardian. It forgets, sometimes, exactly what it is supposed to be protecting. No matter. It knows it when it sees it.</p>
			<p>It sees her now, crawling from a hole in the bottom of the world. She looks much like the others, but it has always been able to tell the difference. Why protect her, and not the others? It doesn’t care. Reptiles never question motives. They only act on them.</p>
			<p>She doesn’t seem to know that it is here, watching.</p>
			<p>The reptile is privy to certain insights that should, by rights, be denied it. It was exiled before the others tweaked their neurochemistry into more sensitive modes. And yet all that those changes did, in the end, was to make certain weak signals more easily discernible against a loud and chaotic background. Since the reptile’s cortex shut down, background noise has been all but silenced. The signals are as weak as ever, but the static has disappeared. And so the reptile has, without realizing it, absorbed a certain muddy awareness of distant attitudes.</p>
			<p>It feels, somehow, that this place has become dangerous, although it doesn’t know how. It feels that the other creatures have disappeared. And yet, the one it protects is still here. With far less comprehension than a mother cat relocating her endangered kittens, the reptile tries to take its charge to safety.</p>
			<p>It’s easier when she stops struggling. Eventually she even allows it to pull her away from the bright lights, back towards the place she belongs. She makes sounds, strange and familiar; the reptile listens at first, but they make its head hurt. After a while she stops. Silently, the reptile draws her through sightless nightscapes.</p>
			<p>Dim light dawns ahead. And sound; faint at first, but growing. A soft whine. Gurgles. And something else, a pinging noise⁠—<i>metallic</i>, Broca murmurs, although it doesn’t know what that means.</p>
			<p>A copper beacon glares out from the darkness ahead⁠—too coarse, too steady, far brighter than the bioluminescent embers that usually light the way. It turns the rest of the world stark black. The reptile usually avoids this place. But this is where she comes from. This is safety for her, even though to the reptile, it represents something completely⁠—</p>
			<p>From the cortex, a shiver of remembrance.</p>
			<p>The beacon shines down from several meters above the sea bed. At closer range it resolves into a string of smaller lights stretched in an arc, like photophores on the flank of some enormous fish.</p>
			<p>Broca sends down more noise: <i>Sodium floods</i>.</p>
			<p>Something huge looms behind those lights, bloating gray against black. It hangs above the sea bed like a great smooth boulder, impossibly buoyant, encircled by lights at its equator. Striated filaments connect it to the bottom.</p>
			<p>And something else, smaller but even more painfully bright, is coming down out of the sky.</p>
			<p>“ThisisCSS<i>Forcipiger</i>outofAstoriaAnybodyhome?”</p>
			<p>The reptile shoots back into the darkness, mud billowing behind it. It retreats a good twenty meters before a dim realization sinks in.</p>
			<p>Broca’s area knows those sounds. It doesn’t understand them⁠—Broca’s never much good at anything but mimicry⁠—but it’s heard something like them before. The reptile feels an unaccustomed twitch. It’s been a long time since curiosity was any use.</p>
			<p>It turns and faces back from whence it fled. Distance has smeared the lights into a diffuse, dull glow. She’s back there somewhere, unprotected.</p>
			<p>It edges back towards the beacon. One light divides again into many; that dim, ominous outline still lurks behind them. And the thing from the sky is settling down on top of it, making noises at once frightening and familiar.</p>
			<p>She floats in the light, waiting. Dedicated, afraid, the reptile comes to her.</p>
			<p>“Heylook.” The reptile flinches, but holds its ground this time. “Ididn’tmeentoostartlyou, butnobodysanseringinside. Imsupposdtopickyouguysup.”</p>
			<p>She glides up towards the thing from the sky, comes to rest in front of the shiny round part on its front. The reptile can’t see what she’s doing there. Hesitantly, its eyes aching with the unaccustomed brightness, it starts after her.</p>
			<p>But she turns and meets it, coming back. She reaches out, guides it down along the bulging surface, past the lights that ring its middle (too bright, too bright), down towards⁠—</p>
			<p>Broca’s Area is gibbering nonstop, <i>eeeebbeeebeebebeebe beebe</i>, and now there’s something else, too, something <i>inside</i> the reptile, stirring. Instinct. Feeling. Not so much memory as <i>reflex⁠—</i></p>
			<p>It pulls back, suddenly frightened.</p>
			<p>She tugs at it. She makes strange noises: <i>togetinsydjerrycumminsiditsallrite⁠—</i> The reptile resists, uncertainly at first, then vigorously. It slides along the gray wall, now a cliff, now an overhang; it scrabbles for purchase, catches hold of some protuberance, clings against this strange hard surface. Its head darts back and forth, back and forth, between light and shadow.</p>
			<p>“⁠—<i>onGerryyouvgaw toocome inside⁠—</i>”</p>
			<p>The reptile freezes. <i>Inside.</i> It knows that word. It even understands it, somehow. Broca’s not alone any more, something else is reaching out from the temporal lobe and tapping in. Something up there actually knows what Broca is talking about.</p>
			<p>What <i>she</i>’s talking about.</p>
			<p>“<i>Gerry⁠—”</i></p>
			<p>It knows that sound too.</p>
			<p>“⁠—<i>please⁠—</i>”</p>
			<p>That sound comes from a long time ago.</p>
			<p>“⁠—<i>trust me</i>⁠—is there <i>any</i> of you left in there? Anything at all?”</p>
			<p>Back when the reptile was part of something larger, not an <i>it</i> at all, then, but⁠—</p>
			<p>—<i>he</i>.</p>
			<p>Clusters of neurons, long dormant, sparkle in the darkness. Old, forgotten subsystems stutter and reboot.</p>
			<p>
				<i>I⁠—</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Gerry?”</p>
			<p><i>My name. That’s my name</i>. He can barely think over the sudden murmuring in his head. There are parts of him still asleep, parts that won’t talk, still other parts completely washed away. He shakes his head, trying to clear it. The new parts⁠—no, the old parts, the very old parts that went away and now they’ve come back <i>and won’t shut the fuck up</i>⁠—are all clamoring for attention.</p>
			<p>Everywhere is so <i>bright</i>. Everywhere hurts. Everywhere⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Words scroll through his mind: <i>The lights are on. Nobody’s home.</i></p>
			<p>The lights come on, flickering.</p>
			<p>He can catch glimpses of sick, rotten things squirming in his head. Old memories grind screeching against thick layers of corrosion. Something lurches into sudden focus: a fist. The feel of bones, breaking in his face. The ocean in his mouth, warm and somehow brackish. A boy with a shockprod. A girl covered in bruises.</p>
			<p>Other boys.</p>
			<p>Other girls.</p>
			<p>Other fists.</p>
			<p>Everything hurts, everywhere.</p>
			<p>Something’s trying to pry his fingers free. Something’s trying to drag him inside. Something wants to bring all this back. Something wants to take him <i>home.</i></p>
			<p>Words come to him, and he lets them out: “don’t you <i>fucking</i> TOUCH ME!”</p>
			<p>He pushes his tormentor away, makes a desperate grab for empty water. The darkness is too far away; he can see his shadow stretching along the bottom, black and solid and squirming against the light. He kicks as hard as he can. Nothing grabs him. After a while the light fades away.</p>
			<p>But the voices shout as loud as ever.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
