<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>References</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="references" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">References</h2>
			<p>Actually, you might be surprised at how much of this stuff I <i>didn’t</i> make up. If you’re interested in finding out about background details, the following references will get you started. <i>Starfish</i>deliberately twists some of the facts, and I’ve probably made a hundred other errors through sheer ignorance, but that’s something else this list is good for: it gives you the chance to check up on me.</p>
			<p>I’m betting most of you don’t care that much.</p>
			<p>
				<b>Deepwater biology</b>
			</p>
			<p>The deep-sea creatures I described pretty much as they exist; if you don’t believe me read “Light in the Ocean’s Midwaters”, by B. H. Robison, in the July 1995 Scientific American. Or <i>Deep-Sea Biology</i> by J.D. Gage &amp; P.A. Taylor (Cambridge University Press, 1992). Or <i>Abyss</i> by C.P. Idyll (Crowell <abbr>Co.</abbr>, 1971); it’s old, but it’s the book that hooked me back in Grade 9. Although the fish we drag up from great depths are generally pretty small in real life, gigantism is not unheard of among some species of deepwater fish. Back in the 1930s, for example, the deepwater pioneer William Beebe claimed to have spotted a seven-foot viperfish from a bathysphere.</p>
			<p>I found lots of interesting stuff in <i>The Sea - Ideas and Observations on Progress in the Study of the Seas. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 7: Deep-Sea Biology</i> (G. T. Rowe, <abbr>ed.</abbr>, 1983 from John Wiley and Sons). In particular, the chapter on biochemical and physiological adaptations of deep-sea animals (by Somero <i>et al.</i>)⁠—as well as <i>Biochemical Adaptation</i>, a 1983 book from Princeton University Press (Hochachka and Somero, Eds.)⁠—got me started on deep-sea physiology, the effects of high pressure on neuronal firing thresholds, and the adaptation of enzymes to high pressure/temperature regimes.</p>
			<p>
				<b>Spreading-zone tectonics/geology</b>
			</p>
			<p>A good layperson’s introduction to the coastal geology of the Pacific northwest, including a discussion of midocean ridges such as Juan de Fuca, can be found in <i>Cycles of Rock and Water</i> by K. A. Brown (1993, HarperCollins West). “The Quantum Event of Oceanic Crustal Accretion: Impacts of Diking at Mid-Ocean Ridges” (J.R. Delaney <i>et al</i>., <i>Science</i> 281, pp222⁠–⁠230, 1998) nicely conveys the nastiness and frequency of earthquakes and eruptions along the Juan de Fuca Rift, although it’s a bit heavy on the technobabble.</p>
			<p>The idea that the Pacific Northwest is overdue for a major earthquake is reviewed in “Giant Earthquakes of the Pacific Northwest”, by R. D. Hyndman (<i>Scientific American</i>, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 1995). “Forearc deformation and great subduction earthquakes: implications for Cascadia offshore earthquake potential” by McCaffrey and Goldfinger (<i>Science</i>v267, 1995) and “Earthquakes cannot be predicted” (Geller <i>et al.</i>, <i>Science</i> v275, 1997) discuss the issue in somewhat greater detail. I used to live quite happily in Vancouver. After reading these items, I moved to Toronto.</p>
			<p>The absolute coolest source for up-to-the-minute information on hydrothermal vents, however, is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) web pages. Everything’s there: raw survey data, research schedules, live maps, three-dimensional seaquake animations, and recent publications. To name but a few. Start at <i>http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents</i> and go from there.</p>
			<p>
				<b>Psionics/Ganzfeld Effects</b>
			</p>
			<p>The rudimentary telepathy I describe actually made it into the peer-reviewed technical literature back in 1994. Check out <i>Does Psi Exist? Replicable evidence for an anomalous process of information transfer</i> by Bem and Honorton, pages 4⁠–⁠18 in Vol 15 of the <i>Psychological Bulletin</i>. They got statistical significance and everything. Speculations on the quantum nature of human consciousess come from the books of Roger Penrose, <i>The Emporer’s New Mind</i> (Oxford University Press, 1989) and <i>Shadows of the Mind</i> (Oxford, 1994).</p>
			<p>
				<b>Smart gels</b>
			</p>
			<p>The smart gels that screw everything up were inspired by the research of Masuo Aizawa, a Professor at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, profiled in the August 1992 issue of <i>Discover</i> magazine. At that time, he’d got a few neurons hooked together into the precursors of simple logic gates. I shudder to think where he’s got to now.</p>
			<p>The application of neural nets to navigating through complex terrain is described in “Robocar” by B. Daviss (<i>Discover</i>, July 1992.), which describes work being done by Charles Thorpe of (where else) Carnegie-Mellon University.</p>
			<p>
				<b>Behemoth</b>
			</p>
			<p>The theory that life originated in hydrothermal vents hails from “A hydrothermally precipitated catalytic iron sulphide membrane as a first step towards life”, by M.J. Russel <i>et al.</i> (<i>Journal of Molecular Evolution</i>, v39, 1994). Throwaway bits on the evolution of life, including the viability of ribosomal RNA as an alternative genetic template, I cadged from “The origin of life on earth” by L.E. Orgel (<i>Scientific American</i>, October 1994). Behemoth’s symbiotic presence within the cells of deepwater fish steals from the work of Lynn Margulis, who first suggested that cellular organelles were once free-living organisms in their own right (an idea that went from heresy to canon in the space of about ten years). Once I’d stuck that idea into the book, I found vindication in “Parasites shed light on cellular evolution” (G. Vogel, <i>Science</i> 275, p1422, 1997) and “Thanks to a parasite, asexual reproduction catches on” (M. Enserinck, <i>Science</i> 275, p1743, 1997).</p>
			<p>
				<b>Sexual abuse as an addictive stimulus</b>
			</p>
			<p>I first encountered the idea that chronic abuse could be physiologically addictive in <i>Psychological Trauma</i> (B. van der Kolk, ed,, American Psychiatric Press 1987). False Memory Syndrome is explored in <i>The Myth of Repressed Memory : False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse</i> by E. Loftus &amp; K. Ketcham (<abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s Press 1996).</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
